occurring in the course of explosions of Type Ia supernovae in faraway galaxies, from whose analysis the conclusion is usually drawn in the standard theory of the dynamics of the Universe that the universal expansion is accelerating in the present epoch (which is inadequate from the standpoint of the phenomenological model under consideration). It should be noted here that the

two examples considered uniquely point to a violation of the Lorentz invariance on cosmological scales, which can be taken to substantiate the introduction of a physically isolated frame of reference with global time common to all the points of the space. Considered as a corollary to the suggested hypothesis of the genetic unity of electromagnetic and strong interactions is the question of the principal existence of stable nuclear associates вҖ“ вҖңnuclear moleculesвҖқ. Considered as an example of such a вҖңmoleculeвҖқ is the hypothetical particle dineutron, the question of whose existence and character of stability has long been discussed in the literature. Also discussed are possible experimental investigations aimed at gaining an insight into the long-discussed mystery of the Universe, namely, its base substance, i.e., the physical vacuum.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction. Physical Vacuum in the Microworld and in Cosmology.
Physical Essence of the Mass-Energy of a Particle and the Genesis of Nuclear Forces.
Planckian Energy-Mass Source. Basic Relations of the Phenomenological Model of the Dynamics of the Universe.
Phenomenological Relations for the Base World Constants and Interaction Constants.
Physical Vacuum Manifestations in Various Periods in the History of the Universe.
Specificities of the Dynamics of the Universe at the early Stages of its Evolution.
Possible Causes of the Anomalies in the Energy Releases of Type Ia Supernovae in Remote Galaxies.
Physical Vacuum in Internuclear Interactions. Do вҖңNuclear MoleculesвҖқ Actually Exist?
Concluding Remarks.

INTRODUCTION. PHYSICAL VACUUM IN THE MICROWORLD AND IN COSMOLOGY
The notions of physical vacuum originated in the course of creation of quantum mechanics, in connection with the development of the idea of spontaneous emission of an isolated excited atom [1]. It was later found that the polarization of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum, the quantum electrodynamics vacuum (QED-vacuum), could manifest itself in the spatial вҖңsmearingвҖқ of the electron and a change, as a result, of the potential energy of its interaction with the nucleus, thus providing conditions for the removal of the degeneracy of the
energies of the 2S ВҪ and 2P ВҪ states in the hydrogen atom вҖ“ the Lamb shift [2]. It was also demonstrated that the quantum fluctuations of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum in regions contiguous with material objects could alter the relativistic quantum relationships in the near-surface regions of the objects and thus give rise to its macroscopic manifestations вҖ“ the Casimir ponderomotive effect [3, 4], Josephson contact noise [5]. It is important to emphasize that all the above effects are of electromagnetic nature: they vanish if the fine structure constant пҒЎe пҖҪ e2 / hc (where e is the electron charge, c is the velocity of light in a
vacuum, and h is the Planck constant) tends to zero [3, 4].
The development of quantum chromodynamics [6] brought in a fresh knowledge of the nature of the physical vacuum on high-energy scales. It turned out in particular that at an energy density (вҖңeffective temperatureвҖқ) of EQED ~ 200 MeV a confinement-deconfinement transition was realized inside the nucleus (quarks were no longer bound in nucleons) to form a quark-gluon plasma or quark soup. The strong interaction constant пҒЎs in that case proved dependent on the excitation energy: its magnitude changed from Оұs ~ 1 at low energies to Оұs вүҲ 0.3 at energies of a few gigaelectron-volts, depending but weakly on energy thereafter [6].
In the last decade, the notions of physical vacuum have come into wide use in cosmology
[7-10]. It is precisely the physical vacuum that is associated, in the standard model of the

dynamics of the Universe, at whose root lie the Friedmann equations of the general theory of relativity (GTR), with вҖңdark energyвҖқ that accounts for 73% of the entire energy of the Universe. It is believed that вҖңdark energyвҖқ is uniformly вҖңspilledвҖқ in the Universe, its unalterable density
being пҒҘV пҖҪ пҒҢc4 / 8пҒ° G , where Оӣ and G are the cosmological and the gravitational constant,
respectively. And attributed to the vacuum of the standard model, in contrast to the QED-
vacuum, is the physically hard-to-perceive equation of state  pV /пҒҘV пҖҪ пҖӯ1with the negative
pressure pV. It is exactly this relationship, suggesting a kind of вҖңantigravityвҖқ due to dark energy, that is postulated as the factor governing the expansion of the Universe. The standard model also considers another physically hard-to-imagine substance вҖ“ dark matter вҖ“ whose energy content amounts to 23%, which is introduced into the Friedmann equations in order to remove contradictions between the magnitudes of the apparent masses of gravitationally bound objects, as well as systems of such objects, and their apparent parameters, including the structural stability of galaxies and galactic clusters in the expanding Universe. Apart from the introduction of the physically obscure entities вҖ“ dark energy and dark matter, the problems involved in the construction of the standard model are accentuated by the unsuccessful attempts to tie in the apparent value ОөV пӮ» 0.66пӮҙ10 вҖ“8 erg/cm3 [11] with the parameters of the physical vacuum introduced in elementary particle physics, the quantum chromodynamics vacuum (QCD-vacuum). The above discrepancies come to more than 40 orders of magnitude if the characteristic energy scale of the quantum chromodynamics vacuum is taken to be EQCD ~ 200
MeV [7, 8], with its energy density being пҒҘ	пҖҪ E 4	/(2пҒ° hc)3 , and over 120 orders of
QCD	QCD
magnitude if one is orientated towards the vacuum of physical fields, wherein quantum effects and gravitational effects would manifest themselves simultaneously, with the Planck energy
density пҒҘ	пҖҪ c7 / 8hG2 [9] playing the part of the characteristic energy scale. Such catastrophic
differences, such an вҖңorder-of-magnitude discrepancyвҖқ is considered a вҖңsevere trial for the entire fundamental theoryвҖқ [9]. The вҖңwantedвҖқ relations discussed in a number of works [9, 12], which are being suggested purely formally, without resort to comprehensible physical models linking up the energy density пҒҘV with the fundamental physical constants, surely cannot help solve the problem.
The natural question now arises as to how much the vacuum of the standard model of the Universe dynamics and the vacuum introduced to describe microworld phenomena, namely, the QCD- and the QED-vacuum, are one and the same vacuum. In this paper, an attempt is made not only to resolve the aggregate of the above problems, but also to develop on a phenomenological basis the conception of the unified physical vacuum for the microworld and the Universe. It has turned out that to solve this problem, it is first of all necessary to take into account the violation of the relativity principle (the Lorentz invariance) on cosmological scales, which is also implied in the standard model according to which the Universe in the present epoch is expanding at an accelerated pace, as compared with the early epochs of its evolution [7вҖ“10].
We will base our arguments upon the validity of the Hubble law at all times during the evolution of the dynamics of the Universe and proceed from the fact that in the early epochs of the evolution of the Universe the speeds of recession of material objects located at the relative distances r exceeded (because of the higher magnitude of the Hubble constant H that is inversely proportional to the age of the Universe) the respective speeds in the present epoch. Besides, we will introduce the concept of polarization of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum in the vicinity of material objects, which actually implies examination of the physical vacuum as a kind of вҖңetherвҖқ, the base medium surrounding any object in our World. Inasmuch as polarization effects must depend on the traverse speed of material objects relative to the base medium introduced, it is precisely the effects of polarization of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum that will be associated with the increase of the inertial mass of the system that a particle forms with the polarization region at relativistic velocities. The pertinent relationships between the mass and the relativistic energy of particles, whose physical essence

still remains a subject of discussion (see Ref. Nos. [13, 14]), will be considered in Sect. 2 of this paper. It should be noted that the active role of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum is not limited to the possibility of polarization alterations in the course of relativistic motion of masses. It is being revealed that to this component of the physical vacuum might be tied вҖңdark energyвҖқ, the energy-saturated substance of the standard model of the dynamics of the Universe.
The last conclusion follows from the analysis of the well-known set of Planck numbers (Sect. 3) initially introduced as purely numerological relations. However, the establishment [15] of the physical meaning of one of the Planck parameters вҖ“ the Planck power вҖ“ from the analysis of SchwartzshildвҖҷs solution of the general theory of relativity for metric in the neighborhood of a unit mass made it possible to alter the status of the Planck numbers and consider them as phenomenological parameters of the dynamics of the Universe. It turned out that the energy-mass source of Planck power that originated at the instant of the Big Bang and is acting constantly could produce the entire energy of the Universe during the course of its evolutional dynamics. In that case, the well-known problems of the standard model of the Universe dynamics, associated with the introduction of the hypothetical entities вҖ“ dark matter and dark energy governing the expansion dynamics of the Universe, can be resolved in a consistent manner on a phenomenological basis. To this end, however, it is necessary to introduce, in accordance with [16], a physically isolated frame of reference вҖ“ the space of the Universe вҖ“ expanding in compliance with the Hubble law, provided that a phenomenological relation the type of the Friedmann equation, which plays the part of the law of conservation of energy, is satisfied at global time common to all the points of the space and reckoned from the Big Bang.
As a medium polarizing on various spatial scales, the physical vacuum introduced appears as a substance that unites and forms all the known types of interaction вҖ“ strong, electromagnetic, weak, and gravitational (Sect. 4). To include gravitation in this union, use is made of an analog of the numerological relation introduced into cosmology by Weinberg [17], which links up the Planck constant with the gravitational constant G and the Hubble radius RH of the Universe (see below). Based on this, we managed to introduce in a uniform fashion a set of
phenomenological relations for the interaction constants and also to represent the set of Planck numbers and the law of universal gravitation in a form revealing their cosmological essence.
Also considered (Sect. 5) are some corollaries of the suggested phenomenological model, which are related to the specificities of the dynamics of the Universe at the early stages of its evolution, as well as to the interpretation of the apparent anomalies in the energy releases occurring in the course of explosions of Type Ia supernovae in faraway galaxies, from whose analysis the conclusion is usually drawn in the standard theory of the dynamics of the Universe that the universal expansion is accelerating in the present epoch (which is inadequate from the standpoint of the phenomenological model under consideration). The two examples considered illustrate violation of the Lorentz invariance on cosmological scales. The question as to the principal existence of stable nuclear associates вҖ“ вҖңnuclear moleculesвҖқ вҖ“ is considered as a corollary to the suggested hypothesis of the genetic unity of electromagnetic and strong interactions in Sect. 6. Considered as an example of such a вҖңmoleculeвҖқ is the hypothetical particle dineutron, the question of whose existence and character of stability has long been discussed in the literature [18]. Discussed in the concluding Sect. 7 are possible experimental investigations aimed at gaining an insight into the principal enigma of the Universe, namely, the essence of its base substance, the physical vacuum.
PHYSICAL ESSENCE OF THE MASS-ENERGY OF A PARTICLE AND THE GENESIS OF NUCLEAR FORCES
The well-known expression for the total energy Eu of a particle possessing a Lorentz-invariant mass of m and moving with a velocity of u,


E пҖҪ пҒЁ mc2 ,
пғҰ
пҒЁu пҖҪ пғ§1 пҖӯ
пғЁ
u2 пғ¶пҖӯ1/ 2

c2 пғ·

,	(1)

is a corollary to EinsteinвҖҷs expression for the rest energy of a particle, E0 = mc2, and the
relativistic relation for the square of its momentum, вҶ’ 2 пҖҪ  1 пҖЁE2 пҖӯ m2c4 пҖ© [13]. Given such a
p	c2	u
formalized determination, there remain questions relating to the physical reasons for the kinetic
component E  пҖҪ (пҒЁ пҖӯ 1)mc2 of the energy of the particle growing with its velocity u tending to
c, as well as to the very phenomenon of the existence of the ultimate velocity СҒ = 3пӮҙ1010 cm/s for a material particle, reflected in the Lorentz transformations. It is exactly for these reasons that there exists an alternative opinion about the velocity dependence of the mass of relativistic particles [14]. It should be noted here that the notions of the effective dependence of the mass of a moving body on its velocity were first developed by Joseph John Thomson [19] who analyzed the motion of a charged sphere modeling an electron and calculated the вҖңelectromagnetic massвҖқ being formed, which determined the effective growth of the mass of the moving sphere. Later on, J.J. Thomson analyzed the problem on the motion of a light wave in ether, as the base
medium (for his time), and obtained the relation E пҖҪ Mc2 for the energy EРў of the mass M of
ether entrained with a velocity of c in the course of such a motion [20, 21]. One half of the contribution to this quantity here was determined by electrostatic energy, and the other half, by the kinetic energy associated with the system of the entrained mass of ether confined in the charge-associated Faraday вҖңtubes of forceвҖқ and moving with the velocity of light. But this energy of the entrained ether appeared as the potential energy of the propagating light wave [21]. It will be demonstrated later in the text that it is precisely J.J. ThomsonвҖҷs idea of the polarization of the surrounding base medium (represented as вҖңetherвҖқ of our day) by the physical vacuum in all its manifestations on various spatial scales, from a few fractions of a micron, where the manifestation of its electromagnetic component begins (the Casimir effect), to atomic scales, whereon the quantum electrodynamics vacuum (QED-vacuum) plays the dominant part, and to subnuclear ones) that enables one to understand the physical nature of EinsteinвҖҷs relation and approach on this basis the concept of the velocity dependence of the mass of relativistic particles. This hypothesis also allows one to insert elements of physical substance into the Lorentz transformations and introduce notions of the intrinsic unity of electromagnetic and strong interactions that reveals the essence of nuclear forces. Within the scope of this hypothesis, the determinative role in the formation of вҖңseedingвҖқ nuclear forces is assigned to the Casimir effect consisting in the dynamic manifestation of a geometrical factor вҖ“ amplification of those frequencies of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum, which are associated with the internal configuration of the nucleus, and suppression of other frequencies.
Following our previous works [22, 23], we will assume that the polarization of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum can have an effect on the dynamics of a particle of mass m moving freely with a velocity of u. It is exactly because the rate of alteration of the physical vacuum adjoining a moving object is limited to the velocity c of light in this vacuum that the motion of material objects with velocities u approaching c proves impossible [22], which formally corresponds to unlimited growth of the вҖңdynamicвҖқ mass Eu/c2 in EinsteinвҖҷs relation. The image of such a вҖңvacuum polaronвҖқ also enables one to comprehend the dynamic meaning of the limitation of the relative velocity of colliding relativistic particles to the quantity
c. Indeed, a collision of вҖңvacuum polaronsвҖқ presupposes the formation, at their interaction stage, of a vacuum polarization region common to both particles, the rate of the alteration of the polarization regions in the vicinity of the colliding particles to form a single polarization region being limited to the velocity c. Physically clear thus become the hypotheses underlying the special theory of relativity (STR) that rest upon a series of fundamental experiments. All that has

been said above implies a certain вҖңmaterializationвҖқ of the Lorentz transformations, as applied to systems showing up in experiments, i.e., interacting or decaying particles.
One more corollary to the presentation of a microparticle in the form of a вҖңvacuum polaronвҖқ [23] should be indicated here. When such a quasiparticle is localized in some particular region of space (a вҖңboxвҖқ of fixed size in the course of formation of a hydrogen atom through localization of an electron at a proton), the polaron вҖңcoatвҖқ should вҖңhave roomвҖқ in this volume, having distorted somehow or other to suit the вҖңboundary conditionsвҖқ. It is precisely in such distortions that one can see the genesis of вҖңactivityвҖқ of the spatial coordinate that is associated with an operator in quantum mechanics. No time discretization arises in this case, and so time can vary continuously. It is for this reason that no time operator is actually introduced in quantum mechanics.
Let us impart to such qualitative considerations a model character by tying the polarization of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum to the Casimir forces developing in the neighborhood of material objects. A characteristic example of such polarization is associated with the analysis of the Casimir forces in a vacuum gap of width d between perfectly smooth metal plates of high electrical conduction [3, 4]. The attractive Casimir force per unit surface area of such plates, determined by the amplification in the gap d of a single, вҖңresonanceвҖқ frequency of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum, given by c/d, and the suppression of a wide spectrum of other frequencies, is expressed in the form [4]


FC (d ) пҖҪ пҖӯ
пҒ° 2 пғ—
/
240
hc .	(2)
d 4


The absence of the fine structure constant пҒЎ пҖҪ e2 / hc in expression (2) is due to the fact that,
given an appropriate calculation, this parameter appears as a вҖңbig quantityвҖқ compared to another characteristic parameter governed by the plasma frequency of the plate metal and the depth of the skin layer [4]. The validity of expression (2) was established experimentally while varying the gap width d from 50 to 5 000 nm [3]. With greater gap widths d, the force proved difficult to measure with high accuracy.
Let us formally interpolate expression (2) for the attractive Casimir potential from the above macroscopic distances to the size of atomic nuclei and elementary particles and consider the polarization, due to the Casimir forces, of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum in the vicinity of a particle of mass m and a across. We will assign to the physical vacuum a coordinate system and assume that the expression for the potential energy of the particle resting in this system, caused by the amplification in the particleвҖҷs volume of one of the frequencies of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum, equal to c/a, and exclusion of a wide spectrum of other frequencies, save for the above вҖңresonanceвҖқ one, has a вҖңCasimireanвҖқ character:

U (r ) пҖҪ пҖӯпҒ§ 0 r
2
2mr 2 l(l пҖ« 1) .	(3)


Here r is the radius-vector (the origin of coordinates is tied to the position of the particle), l is the azimuthal quantum number, and пҒ§0 is a dimensionless parameter characterizing the intensity of the interaction under consideration (the magnitude of this parameter will be determined below). If we formally transform the Casimir force per unit surface area of the mutually attracting plates to the corresponding potential energy of polarization of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum in the neighborhood of a sphere of radius r = d/2, then Оі0 = ОіРЎ = ПҖ3/960 вүҲ 1/31. Obviously correspondent to the Coulomb potential developed by a unit charge of e is Оі0 = ОіРө =
пҒЎ пҖҪ e2 / hc вүҲ 1/137.
There arise the natural questions: How much is interpolation (3) justified? How much is the introduction of the concept of a vacuum undergoing polarization on nuclear scales adequate

to the hypothesis of amplification of the select вҖңresonanceвҖқ modes and suppression of all the other modes? Is it possible to treat expression (3) as a phenomenological interpolation, bearing in mind that corollaries obtained on the basis of this expression can have a physical meaning? The basis for the invoking the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum and Casimir forces to the analysis of phenomena occurring on the nuclear level is provided by the giant dipole resonance phenomenon [24вҖ“26] well known in nuclear physics. This phenomenon consists in the excitation of collective electric dipole and more complex modes of nuclear matter, given sufficiently large cross-sections (~ 50 mb) for the absorption of пҒ§-quanta by nuclei (experimental data are available for all stable isotopes). The very fact of the principal possibility of amplification of some resonance frequencies of nuclear matter owing to its interaction with electromagnetic field and suppression of a spectrum of вҖңnonresonanceвҖқ frequencies suggests the possibility of manifestation of the Casimir effect in the atomic nucleus. Obviously the effective constant Оұp-GDR for the absorption of пҒ§-quanta accompanied by the excitation of the p-mode of the giant dipole resonance must in this case be determined by both the fine structure constant пҒЎe and the strong interaction constant пҒЎs: пҒЎp-GDR = пҒЎp-GDR(пҒЎe, пҒЎs).
Certain grounds for the hypothesis put forward can also be seen in the fact of the existence of a spin in various nuclei and elementary particles. According to Ohanian [27], the spin of a particle can be treated as a moment developing as a result of a circulating energy flux or moment of momentum in the field associated with the particle itself. In the case being considered, this field if formed upon polarization of the particle-adjoining region of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum, which is an open system. It is important to keep in mind [27] that the spin in this case does not depend on the internal structure of the particle. In a sense, it is precisely the conditions obtaining at the physical vacuum-particle boundary that can determine, as in the case of development of the Casimir forces in macroscopic gaps [3, 4], the spin multiplicity of пҒЁ/2 or zero in each particular case where the Casimit forces manifest themselves as a seeding nuclear interaction for hadrons possessing an internal structure. The solution of the SchrГ¶dinger equation in a centrally symmetric field with a potential energy in form (3) is well known (see, for example, Ref. No. [28], paragraph 36). The energy levels E(n, l) of a discrete spectrum at a potential energy of (3), which reflect the degree of the polarization-induced interrelation between a particle of mass m and the electromagnetic
component of the physical vacuum, are expressed in the form
2 mc2
E(nr ,l) пҖҪ пҖӯпҒ§ 0 2n2 ,	n вүҘ l + 1,	(4)
where n is the principal quantum number. The expression for the вҖңBohr radiusвҖқ aB determining the localization region of the particle in this case has the form

aB пҖҪ
h

/
пҒ§ 0mc
.	(4Р°)


It follows from expression (3) that when пҒ§ 0 пҖҪ	2 , the position of the lower energy level
(determined at l = 0 and n = 1) that characterizes the energy of bonding between the particle under consideration and the physical vacuum corresponds in magnitude to the rest energy of the particle in EinsteinвҖҷs formulation, E0 = mc2. The localization region of the particle in the physical vacuum, defined by expression (4a), will thereafter be considered as the spatial scale of such a вҖңpolaronвҖқ. (Traditionally such a scale is associated with the Compton wavelength lc пҖҪ 2пҒ° h / mc .)
The result (4) obtained can be considered as a kind of вҖңjustificationвҖқ of using expression
(3) up to distances corresponding to the sizes of elementary particles, for it leads to physically meaningful results. First of all, it becomes clear that the physical vacuum can actually be treated as some base medium whereto are tied all objects of our world. Also clear becomes the physical reason for the appearance in the expression for the rest particle energy of a characteristic of this base medium, namely, the velocity of light in a vacuum, as a characteristic of the rate of

alteration of the conditions of conjugation of the particle moving in the physical vacuum with its electromagnetic component. It may be that the polarization of a particle in the physical vacuum can be considered as a factor of additional stabilization of elementary particles and stable isotopes. It is not unlikely that it is such a polarization that plays the part of the PoincarГ© вҖңrubber bandsвҖқ [29] holding the electron, as well as any other charged particle, from detachment. It cannot be ruled out that the nature of the confinement of quarks within hadrons [6] should also be associated with the Casimir forces. Also of interest are the excited states of a particle localized in the vacuum. Specifically such levels can appear as вҖңresonancesвҖқ, short-lived excited
states in hadrons, with characteristic lifetimes in the range 10вҖ“22вҖ“10вҖ“24 s, formed upon interaction of пҒ°-mesons with nucleons [30].
It is obvious that despite the вҖңconnectionвҖқ being discussed between all material particles and the physical vacuum, the directivity of all local processes involving the so-called вҖңfreeвҖқ particles, i.e., particles linked up with the vacuum only, should be realized in accordance with the principle of least action (PLA) [31], with the laws of conservation of energy, momentum, and moment of momentum being satisfied. This also refers to processes initiated by fluctuations of the physical vacuum (emission of a photon by an isolated excited atom, radiative decay). And the above-mentioned directivity actually causes the connection to the physical vacuum of the final products of each particular local process to decrease, the remaining portion of the energy stored in the physical vacuum being converted to heat (dissipated). How the physical vacuum energy is being made up for its portion expended in dissipation will be explained in Sect. 3.
According to expression (4a), the Bohr radius for a proton is aB = 1.4пӮҙ10вҖ“14 cm, i.e., it corresponds to the scale of action of nuclear forces. And this is only natural, for potential energy
(3) at l = 0 and the corresponding dimensionless interaction constant пҒЎs may be represented in the form

U (r ) пҖҪ пҖӯ

r
2
пҖҪ пҖӯ  s  ,
r
пҒЎ пҖҪ q2 пҖҪ
s	hc
.	(3a)

Such character of interaction with the physical vacuum is inherent to any elementary particle. If the particle is structureless (a lepton) and neutral, expression (4) exhausts the informational significance of potential energy (3a). If the particle possesses a structure (a hadron), relation (3a) within such a particle can be treated as a вҖңseedingвҖқ potential energy of nuclear forces characterized by the strong interaction constant пҒЎs. It is evident that owing to the dynamic mobility of nuclear matter вҖңinsideвҖқ such an elementary particle the seeding potential of nuclear forces is screened, and there develop effective potentials of вҖңshort-livedвҖқ nuclear forces, similar to the Yukawa potential, that should be introduced into analysis instead of (3a). This corresponds to the standard notion of the dynamic nature of nuclear forces that are usually associated with пҒ°-meson exchanges between nucleons.
The unexpectedness of the last result consists in the actually detectable physical unity of electromagnetic and strong interactions. Insofar as the nature of the Casimir effect is associated with local spatial variations of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum in the vicinity and inside of a material object, with the resonant amplification of certain frequencies specific to the structure of the object and exclusion of the other frequencies contained in the spectrum of the physical vacuum, nuclear forces in such a model are the response, on nuclear space-time scales, of nuclear matter to the action of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum. Obviously such a response is extremely peculiar and depends both on the configuration and dynamics specificities of each nucleus and on its excitation. From this standpoint one can qualitatively comprehend the above-mentioned excitation dependence of the strong interaction constant пҒЎs [6].
In connection with the conclusion drawn about the genetic unity of electromagnetic and nuclear forces, note here that the intrinsic closeness of electromagnetic and weak interactions, whose carriers are vector bosons вҖ“ photons and heavy bosons, respectively, is of an absolutely

different nature. These interactions prove to be a single electroweak interaction only at energies on the order of 100 GeV, which is comparable with the rest energy of intermediate vector bosons [6]. However, it can be assumed that it is exactly the fluctuations of the Casimir field (3a), associated with the internal dynamics of nuclei, that initiate the emergence of virtual vector bosons and effective realization of four-fermion interactions leading to weak nuclear processes at low energies. In that way, actually introduced here is a certain generalized image of the physical vacuum wherein manifest are strong, electromagnetic, and weak interactions. It will be demonstrated later in the text how the above set of interactions is naturally supplemented with gravitation whose essence is also directly associated with the polarization of the physical vacuum introduced.
The assumption made as to the connection, according to (4), between material particles and the physical vacuum agrees with the above-mentioned notions of the present-day cosmology about the apparent вҖңfreezingвҖқ of material objects in to the expanding space of the Universe. It is exactly as an exhibition of such a вҖңfreezing-inвҖқ that each galaxy, each galactic cluster moves as an integral system in the course of expansion of the Universe, with the relative movements of individual stars, constellations, and nebulae within each galaxy being extremely variegated as a result of their interactions realized in accordance with the principle of least action. It is therefore but natural to associate with the very expanding Universe the physical vacuum introduced as the base medium and the sole frame of reference with unified global time common for all objects in the Universe, as suggested by Burlankov [16]. It is natural in that case to consider as вҖңrest massesвҖқ the masses of those objects of the Universe (galaxies, their clusters, nebulae, etc.) which rest relative to the expanding base reference system, so that their relative speeds of recession are governed solely by the expansion of the Universe and are not associated with the movement of these objects relative to the base system.
Obviously if such a reference system is selected, the degree of вҖңfreezing-inвҖқ of the objects can grow higher in the case of their relativistic motion relative to this system, when the vacuum polarization region diminishes along the travel direction and tends to zero as u вҶ’ СҒ. And it is precisely the difficulties of the dynamic alteration of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum in the region of its conjugation with a material body, the vanishing of the вҖңlubricantвҖқ necessary for the body to move in the base medium, that can lie behind the nature of the relativistic inertial mass growth in accordance with FeynmanвҖҷs understanding of relation (1)
[14] and the impossibility for an object to move in the medium with the velocity of light. Such a position entirely corresponds to J.J. ThomsonвҖҷs idea that the kinetic perturbations of the surrounding medium (meant here is J.J. ThomsonвҖҷs вҖңetherвҖқ [20, 21]) arising in the course of movement of a charged particle as a result of displacement of the Faraday tubes towards a plane normal to the travel direction of the particle and the ensuing increase in the amount of ether entrained by the tubes are equivalent to the potential (an not kinetic!) energy of the moving particle, making for an increase of precisely this energy component. On the phenomenological

level, this inference can be expressed by the replacement пҒ§ 2 / 2 пӮ® пҒЁ
in expressions (4) and (4a).

According to J.J Thomson, it is exactly this factor, О·u, that characterizes the increase of the mass of ether entrained by the Faraday tubes in the course of movement of a charged particle with a velocity of u (see Ref. No. [20], Eq. (1), p. 35).
In the introductory section, we indicated the set of problems facing the standard theory of the dynamics of the Universe. In our opinion, the solution of these problems should rely not on вҖңcosmeticвҖқ corrections, like the introduction of a modified law of gravitation at superlong distances into the cosmological models being developed [32, 33], but on alteration of the basic positions of the present-day cosmology. It is precisely the rejection of the paramount principle of the general theory of relativity, the principle of relativity or Lorentz invariance, on cosmological scales, the introduction of the concept of physical vacuum вҖңtiedвҖқ to the expanding Universe, considered as a unified integral system, with unified global time introduced, that allows the problems facing the standard theory to be resolved, provided that some additional hypotheses are brought in. In particular, it is precisely the effects of growth of inertial masses in the course of

their relativistic movement with respect to the base system that the enigmatic вҖңdark matterвҖқ phenomenon will be associated with later in the text (Sect. 5.1).
And at the same time, the physical vacuum appears as the present-day вҖңetherвҖқ, as a certain material substance. We believe that it is precisely this medium that is characterized, as the base medium for all the objects of the Universe, by the constancy of properties in time (the more so since unified global time for all the objects is introduced), homogeneity, and isotropism on absolutely spatial scales, from subnuclear to tens and hundreds of millions of light years, whereon changes in the world constants still remain imperceptible (Sect. 5). And according to the Noether theorem [34], such properties of a medium provide for the implementation of the laws of conservation of energy, momentum, and moment of momentum in the course of dynamic movements of all material objects included in this medium in accordance with the principle of least action [31]. It is also important to emphasize that the physical vacuum appears, too, as an energy-saturated substance that governs the apparent dynamics of the Universe. The phenomenological grounds for the last deduction is provided by the well-known set of Planck numbers initially introduced as purely numerological relations.

PLANKIAN	ENERGY-MASS	SOURCE.	BASIC	RELATIONS	OF	THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL MODEL OF THE UNIVERSE DYNAMICS

The Planck parameters вҖ“ Planck length, aPl, Planck time, tPl, and Planck mass, mPl вҖ“ were introduced by Max Planck in 1899 from dimensionality considerations by combining the base world constants вҖ“ пҒЁ, c, and G [35]:



aPl
пҖҪ 2 4
Gh пҖҪ 2пҖӯ 12
c3
h
mPlc
пӮ» 1.91пғ—10пҖӯ33 cm,

tPl
пҖҪ aPl
c
пҖҪ 2 4
Gh пӮ» 0.64 пғ—10пҖӯ43 s,
c5


mPl
пҖҪ 2пҖӯ 34
hc пӮ» 1.31пғ—10пҖӯ5 g.	(5)
G

(The choice of the numerical factors appearing in the above expressions will be explained elsewhere in the text.) The values of the length and time parameters, aPl and tPl, respectively, are absolutely unattainable under conditions of physical experiment at all times [35]. Also unattainable in accelerators is the energy mPlc2 determined by the Planck mass, though there is nothing mysterious in the mass mPl. To unite the entire set of Planck numbers by imparting to them an outward feature of вҖңunattainabilityвҖқ, it seems natural to introduce the Planck power wPl
instead of the parameter mPl:
wPl = mPlc2/ tPl = c5/2G пӮ» 1.8пӮҙ1059 erg/s,	(6)

whose value appears as abnormal as those of the parameters aPl and tPl.
Although the Planck parameters have attracted attention of investigators for over 100 years now, especially since the thirties of the last century, in connection with the search for ways to naturally combine quantum mechanics and gravitation, the purely numerological genesis of the pertinent relations, the absence of any model arguments confirming the validity of the interest shown, left grounds for heuristic expectations only. The situation, however, has lately
changed. In our previous work [15], we demonstrated that the parameter wPl could be included in the analysis of the phenomena that the general theory of relativity is concerned with. To this end, suffice it to examine SchwartzshildвҖҷs solution of EinsteinвҖҷs equations of the GTR for the ds2 metric of the Friedmann space with global time in spherical coordinates (r, Оё, ПҶ) in the vicinity of a unit material object of mass M (see Ref. No. [16], p. 258):

ds2 пҖҪ пғҰ1 пҖӯ  2MG пғ¶ c2dt 2 пҖ« 2  2MG dtdr пҖӯ пҒӣdr 2 пҖ« r 2 пҖЁdпҒұ 2 пҖ« sin2 пҒұ dпҒӘ 2 пҖ©пҒқ.	(7)
пғ§	rc2 пғ·	r
It	follows	from	expression	(7)	that	the	time-like	component	of	the	interval
g	~ пҒ№ пҖЁr пҖ© пҖҪ пҖӯпғҰ1 пҖӯ rSc пғ¶ goes to zero at distances r = r	пҖҪ 2GM	from the object. It is well

00	пғ§	пғ·
пғЁ	r пғё

/
Sc	c 2

known that this result was used as an argument in favor of the existence of вҖңblack holesвҖқ. If we use the different notation
пғҰ	w пғ¶

пҒ№ пҖЁr пҖ© пҖҪ пҖӯпғ§1 пҖӯ
w
пғ· ,	(8)

пғЁ	Sc пғё
Mc3	2
where the quantity w пҖҪ	can be treated as the power of the source producing the energy Mc
r

in the time r/c and the parameter
wSc пҖҪ
Mc3 rSc
пҖҪ c5
2G
appears as the power corresponding to the

Schwartzshild time tSc = rSc/c, the same logic then leads to the conclusion that the existence of a source with a power of wSc is possible. It is precisely by comparing between wSc and wPl and
postulating, by analogy with expression (4a), the relation a	пҖҪ 2пҖӯ 12 h / m c that the numerical
factors entering into expression (5) were determined. Of the above-mentioned Planck numbers it is obviously only the power wPl, whose definition contains no PlanckвҖҷs constant h , can be considered as a parameter of GTR equations including no h in explicit form.
The organic unity of the parameter wPl with the GTR formalism is also substantiated by the fact [15] that the constantly acting hypothetical source of Planck power, which originated concurrently with the beginning of the inflatory phase of the Big Bang [36], could produce the entire energy-mass of the apparent Universe during the course of its evolution. To make sure of that, let us introduce, as in the standard model, the quantities пҒҘVe, пҒҘdm, and пҒҘb characterizing respectively the average energy densities of the QED-vacuum, вҖңdark matterвҖқ (the physical meaning of this component will be explained later in the text), and baryonic component. Let us also introduce the total average energy density пҒҘtot = пҒҘVe + пҒҘdm + пҒҘb. We will associate the above
energy densities пҒҘVe, пҒҘdm, and пҒҘb with the configurational volume V  пҖҪ 4 пҒ°R3  confined in a
H	3	H
sphere of the Hubble radius RH пҖҪ H (see Ref. No. [36]) that is sometimes defined as the вҖңradius
of the UniverseвҖқ. Note that according to the present-day estimates [11], in the present epoch H = 73 km/(sпғ—Mpc) пӮ» 2.36пӮҙ10вҖ“18 sвҖ“1, so that HвҖ“1 пӮ» 13.7 billion years, and for an estimation value of the radius of the Universe, we have RH = c/H ~ 1028 cm. And at the same time, the average energy density of the Universe is пҒҘtot пӮ» 0.9пӮҙ10вҖ“8 erg/cm3.
We will assume that the inflatory phase of the Big Bang concluded with the origination of a
hypothetical source of the Planck power, whose energy is being uniformly distributed and generated constantly in every element of the already originated and originating space, each element of the UniverseвҖҷs volume expanding as a result of such an energy release, though actual manifestations of this expansion can only be fixed on cosmological scales. In that case, one can
readily estimate the amount of energy, Etot, which the constantly acting Planckian source could have produced during the lifetime t of the Universe, if one defines this time as the reciprocal of the Hubble parameter, t = H вҖ“ 1, and assumes in addition that the power wPl of the source is independent of the age of the expanding Universe. It is evident that

Etot пҖҪ wPlt пҖҪ
c	пғ— 1
2G  H
пҖҪ 4 пҒ° R3 пҒҘ	.	(9)
3

Considering that RH = c/H, we get from the above expression


пҒҘtot
пҖҪ 3c2H 2
8пҒ° G
.	(10)

Expression (10) for the average density пҒҘtot of the energy-mass obtained from the Planckian source of the Universe during the time t of its existence/expansion in compliance with the relation RH = c/H = ct will be used as the main relation for the expanding base reference system being introduced, whereto the physical vacuum will be assumed to be tied. It should be noted here that purely phenomenological relation (9) cannot be considered as the equation of the dynamics of the expanding Universe. Indeed, the parameters пҒҘtot and c can themselves vary with the time t, but so that the right-hand side of equation (9) is linear in time, as is the left-hand one for which relation (6) is time invariable.
We take as the base physical object the three-dimensional spherical Euclidean space of the Universe that is associated with the physical vacuum and varies dynamically during the global time t common to all the points of the space and reckoned from the Big Bang. We assume that some of the mass of the Universe moves with respect to the base system with relatively low velocities compared to the velocity of light. We associate with this portion of the mass only that fraction of the term пҒҘb, which is defined in the standard model as the density of the baryonic component of the mass of the Universe. Traditionally entered into the composition of пҒҘb are also nonbaryonic components (electrons, neutrinos, electromagnetic radiation). As for that portion of the mass, which moves relative to the base system with velocities close to the velocity of light, we refer the вҖңrest massвҖқ corresponding to this portion to the term пҒҘb as well, while the energy content determined, according to Feynman and co-authors [14], by the relativistic growth of the corresponding inertial mass will be related to the term пҒҘdm introduced in the standard model. We retain the abbreviation for the subscript on the term пҒҘdm that is now associated with the вҖңdynamic massвҖқ, rather than with the hypothetical вҖңdark matterвҖқ, as this is introduced in the standard model. In so doing, we naturally retain, in accordance with the available data [11], the mass fraction пҒ—dm = пҒҘdm/пҒҘtot = 0.23 of the term пҒҘdm and also attribute the mass fraction пҒ—V = пҒҘV/пҒҘtot =
0.73 to the term пҒҘVe. Later in the text (Sect. 5.1) we will present arguments explaining the sufficiently high proportion (23%) of вҖңdark matterвҖқ in the total energy balance of the Universe.
We will assume that the energy of the Planckian source is being released in every element of this space. Such an introduction of the energy-mass source is quite adequate to the presentation of the dynamics of the Universe in the Friedmann equations, wherein the entire mass and energy are assumed to be uniformly distributed throughout the Universe. It is precisely owing to the energy-mass source constantly acting in every element of volume that the disbalance, continually arising, as mentioned above, between the energy content of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum and the local background electric field distributions in the space of the Universe, is compensated for. The introduction into the model of the dynamics of the Universe of the Planckian source that permanently produces energy-mass in every elementary volume of the Universe also agrees with the main cosmological principle according to which all the points at rest in the base space are equivalent up to location or, in other words, every observer at one and the same instant of time, irrespective of the observation point and direction, sees one and the same picture in the Universe. In that case, in contrast to the momentary Big Bang model, the radial components of matter scattering from every point of the volume formed at each subsequent instant of time are being naturally compensated for, so that a medium is formed with an isotropic and homogeneous distribution of matter and pressure
effective in this medium. And it is exactly this pressure, peff, sustained through the action of the Planckian source, that could perform work on increasing the volume of the Universe by вҖңpushing apartвҖқ previously formed matter.
We  will  assume  that  the  expansion  dynamics  of  the  base  medium obeys  the
phenomenological Hubble relation for the rate of change, aЛҷ , of the metric a:

aЛҷ пҖҪ Ha ,	(11)
where H = 1/t is the Hubble parameter, as well as phenomenological relation (10) that integrally reflects the law of conservation of energy in the Universe at each instant of time. Considering formula (11), relation (10) may be formally written down in the form of the Friedmann equation [7, 8, 36] for the Euclidean space, but with a different meaning of the parameters пҒҘVe and edm:

пғҰ aЛҷ пғ¶2
пғ§ a пғ·
пҖҪ 8пҒ° G
3c2
(пҒҘVe пҖ« пҒҘdm пҖ« пҒҘb ) .	(12)

пғЁ	пғё
To evaluate the quantity peff, we consider the amount пҒ„A of work expended on the formation of fresh space upon enlargement of the radius RH of the Universe in a time of пҒ„t. Considering relation (11), we find

пҒ„A пҖҪ пҒҘVe w
пҒ„t пҖҪ p  пҒ„V
пҖҪ p	пҒ„VH пғ— пҒ„RH
пҒ„t пҖҪ p
пғ— 3V
HпҒ„t ,	(13)

пҒҘ
so that for peff we get
Pl
tot
eff
H RH
eff



пҒҘ c5
/
пҒ„RH	пҒ„t

1
eff	H

peff пҖҪ 	Ve	 пҖҪ /пҒҘVe .	(14)
8пҒ°пҒҘtot R3 HG	3
Expression (14) actually вҖңreplacesвҖқ the Friedmann second equation [7, 8, 36] in the standard model, derived from which is usually the equation of state that relates the effective pressure p averaged over all galaxies and galactic clusters to the density of the energy states of the Universe. (The pressure p considered in the standard model is made negative in magnitude in order to realize вҖңantigravityвҖқ.) Evaluation (14) yields peff вүҲ 2.2пӮҙ10 вҖ“9 erg/cm3, which completely agrees with the values taken for the repulsion pressure [8]. In the phenomenological model under consideration, there is no need to introduce hypotheses of the negative pressure and antigravity
of the physical vacuum, and the effective pressure peff, positive by implication of its introduction, brings into effect the permanent expansion of the Universe through the вҖңpushing apartвҖқ of the already formed matter. It should also be emphasized that the вҖңinclusionвҖқ of the Planckian source as a factor governing the dynamics of the Universe in each of its elementary volumes is not manifest in any specific features of the dynamics that could reveal this source, because of the contribution to the time-like component of any interval under analysis going to zero in accordance with expression (7).
Moreover, the Planckian source model is free from the problems arising when discussing the topology of the space of the Universe in the general probability theory, specifically in the Friedmann model constructed for a singly connected system вҖ“ the PoincarГ© 3D sphere, wherein all the points at rest are equivalent up to location. For such a sphere, it is traditionally assumed that the point at which the primordial Bang had occurred is where we are now and where all the rest of the points are, because initially all the discernible points of space had been in a single place (see Ref. No. [35], Chap. 14). The recent proof by Perelman [37] of the PoincarГ© hypothesis that any three-dimensional manifold is topologically equivalent to a three-dimensional sphere, provided that all the loops on the manifold can be contracted to a point, has strengthened the arguments associating our Universe with a three-dimensional sphere. Furthermore, in that case the Big Bang theory could seem more natural: if such a three-dimensional figure can be contracted to a вҖңpointвҖқ, then to expand it from a вҖңpointвҖқ is also possible. Nevertheless, the absolute impossibility to represent a three-dimensional sphere as a physical object that could originate upon a point Bang with divergent flows of the material substance being formed, and with the complete equivalence, too, of all the points within its volume being retained during the course of its subsequent evolution, leaves grounds for doubts. The question now arises as to how the radial velocity components of the primordial substance formed at the instant of the Big Bang from some small volume are transformed into the radial components of matter scattering from every point of the volume formed at the subsequent instants of time. In conditions of the Plankian source active in the Universe with a topology in the form of a three-dimensional sphere under consideration, no such questions arise.

But what is the mechanism of interaction between material objects and the physical vacuum, which is introduced by means of the cosmological constant пҒҢ through the relation пҒҘVe =
пҒҢc4/8пҒ°G and leads to macroscopic manifestations? First of all, one should bear in mind here the Casimir ponderomotive effect [3, 4] associated with the development of quantum fluctuations in the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum as a result of relativistic quantum interactions between charges and currents in the near-surface regions of material objects. We thereby associate with the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum the entire aggregate of the possible actions governing the вҖңpushing apartвҖқ of the material objects of the Universe during the course of its expansion. It is exactly such an energy-saturated vacuum, characterized by the energy density пҒҘVe, that can produce a mechanical, ponderomotive effect on charged particles of matter forming extended radiation regions and вҖңbeltsвҖқ in the neighborhood of stars in the previously formed galaxies and their clusters.
It should be noted, too, that since the Planckian source also produces baryonic components of matter, whose averaged energy density is characterized by the quantity пҒҘm = пҒҘb +
пҒҘdm, with due regard being given to the increase of their inertial mass, there should form, in addition to the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum, also the quantum chromodynamics vacuum (QCD-vacuum) with its characteristic energy scales [7вҖ“9]. Of course, excitation of such a vacuum involving generation of particle-antiparticle pairs requires adequate energies, so that this circumstance should not appear in relation (10) that integrally reflects the law of conservation of energy at each instant of time. But as we ascertained in Sect. 2, the physical vacuum introduced by us, wherewith is associated the base coordinate system with global time common to all components of the system, is verily the unified physical vacuum manifesting itself as the quantum chromodynamics vacuum on subnuclear scales.
The results presented in this section have allowed us to resolve the problems arising in the standard theory from unified positions, with the Plankian energy-mass source being introduced along with the base reference system with common global time, and develop physically substantiated notions of the possible essence of вҖңdark energyвҖқ and вҖңdark matterвҖқ. It is important to note here that the physical vacuum also appears as a substance that unites and forms all the known interactions вҖ“ strong, electromagnetic, weak, and gravitational, as will be demonstrated in the next section.


PHENOMENOLOGICAL RELATIONS FOR THE BASE WORLD CONSTANTS AND INTERACTION CONSTANTS

To include gravity in consideration, along with other interactions, let us first analyze the numerological relation for the Planck constant h . The possibility of a formal вҖңcosmologicalвҖқ representation of the constant h was previously discussed by Weinberg [17] who paid attention to the approximate equality
h пӮ» 2пҒ° G1/2mпҒ° R1/2 ,	(13)
where mпҒ° is the mass of a pi-meson. We will demonstrate below that the numerological representation of the Planck constant is heuristically useful, for it helps understand not only the cosmological essence of the Planck numbers, but also the law of universal gravitation, if the expression for h is represented somewhat differently:
1 2  3 2
h пҖҪ 1 G1/2m3/2 R1/ 2 пҖҪ 1 G1/ 2m3/2c1/ 2 H пҖӯ1/ 2 пҖҪ	G	E	,	(14)
/	/

2пҒ°
or, considering relation (10),
Q	H	2пҒ°	Q

31/ 2 E3/2 H 1/ 2
h пҖҪ
, .	(14Р°)



Introduced here is the new energy parameter EQ = mQc2 вүҲ 209.5 MeV, whose value is determined such that expression (14) is not an approximate, but an exact equality and the well-known relation between the de Broglie wavelength and the momentum of a particle is valid. In that case, the parameter EQ can be considered as the specific energy of alteration of the physical vacuum corresponding to an elementary quantum of action. It should be noted that the value of the quantity EQ found proves to be correspondent to the energy scale, EQCD, considered in quantum chromodynamics. As already noted above, it is precisely at an energy of EQCD ~ 200 MeV that quarks within a nucleus cease to be bound in nucleons, so that a quark-gluon plasma is formed, and it is precisely this parameter that is being treated as a characteristic determining the masses of light quarks, the proton, neutron, and rho particle [6вҖ“8, 38]. Note that the use of the quantity EQCD = 209.5 MeV in computing the nucleon mass mN by the approximate formula expressing it in terms of the quark condensate [38] yields mN вүҲ 899 MeV/c2, which differs from the experimental value by a mere 5%.
It also proves convenient to represent expression (14) in the form

пҖЁ2пҒ° hпҖ©2 H
пҖҪ 8пҒ° 2cH
a2 пҖҪ
8пҒ° 2c2a2
Q .	(14b)
/

m3 c
Q	mQ RH

Here a  пҖҪ 2пҖӯ 12 h / m c пӮ» 0.65пӮҙ10вҖ“13 cm = 0.65 fermi is the вҖңBohr radiusвҖқ associated with the
mass mQ. The quantity mQ = EQ/c2 вүҲ 3.72пӮҙ10 вҖ“25 g found can be assigned the meaning of an вҖңelementary gravitational massвҖқ. In that case, it proves convenient to normalize the masses mi of the ith particles appearing in the law of universal gravitation to mQ, considering пҒӯi = mi/mQ
as the relative mass of the ith particle. One should then treat the quantity g 2 вүЎ Gm 2 as the
square of the elementary вҖңgravitational chargeвҖқ and introduce, by analogy with electromagnetism, the dimensionless gravitational interaction constant пҒЎg defined by the expression
Gm2
пҒЎ пҖҪ 	Q  .	(15)
g	hc

Considering expressions (14b) and (9), we get
1

2 hH
5	2 aQ	5	2
1	пғҰ EQ пғ¶ 2
пҖӯ 40

пҒЎ g пҖҪ (2пҒ° )
пҖҪ 2 2 пҒ°
пҖҪ 2 2 пҒ° пҒҙ QH пҖҪ 2 2 пҒ° пғ§	пғ·	пӮ» 2.9 пғ—10
,	(15Р°)

mQc	RH
пғЁ Etot пғё

where П„Q = aQ/c вүҲ 0.65 fermi/c вүҲ 2.17пӮҙ10 вҖ“24 s is the characteristic вҖңBohr timeвҖқ associated with the mass mQ.
Reflected in expression (15a) is the quantum essence of gravitational interaction (Оұg ~
h ) and its dependence on the quantity c (Оұg пӮ® 0 as СҒ пӮ® пӮҘ ) and the Hubble constant H (the
age of the Universe). According to this expression, gravitation is determined by the perturbation of the physical vacuum caused by material objects. The quantity пҒЎg presented above is 38 orders of magnitude smaller than the fine structure constant пҒЎe. Expressions (14b) and (15a) reveal the genesis of such weakness of gravitational interaction: the parameters of local perturbations induced in a vacuum by a particle placed therein are compared with quantities of corresponding dimensions pertaining to the Universe as a whole. The name вҖңlaw of universal gravitationвҖқ given to the empirical relation describing the gravitational interaction of two arbitrary masses is thereby вҖңjustifiedвҖқ at the conceptual level. For comparison, let us

present the quantity вҖңsquared elementary weak interaction chargeвҖқ q 2 пӮә G /пҒЎ 2, where G =
F	F	Q	F
1.436пӮҙ10вҖ“49 erg cm3 пӮ» 1.17пӮҙ10вҖ“5(пҒЁc)3 GeVвҖ“2 is the Fermi constant [6, 39], and also the corresponding dimensionless constant пҒЎF = q 2/(пҒЁc) пӮ» 1.04пӮҙ10вҖ“6. The corresponding dimensionless strong interaction constant пҒЎs = q 2/(пҒЁc) = пғ– 2 was written down above.
It should be noted that the use of the characteristic quantities aQ and mQ introduced allow the Planck numbers lPl, tPl, mPl, and wPl written down above (see expressions (5), (6)) to be represented in a more compact form:

1
пғҰ a  пғ¶ 2
1
пғҰ a  пғ¶ 2
1
1	пғҰ R  пғ¶ 2
m c2	R

a	пҖҪ 2a
пғ§  Q  пғ·  , t
пҖҪ 2пҒҙ
пғ§  Q  пғ·	, m	пҖҪ
m пғ§   H  пғ·  , w
пҖҪ   Q	 пғ—  H  .	(16)

Pl	Q  R
Pl	Q  R
Pl	4пҒ°
Q пғ§ a  пғ·
Pl	8пҒ°пҒҙ	a

пғЁ  H пғё
пғЁ  H пғё
пғЁ  Q пғё	Q	Q


Relations (16) demonstrate the cosmological essence of the вҖңsmallnessвҖқ of the Planck parameters lPl and tPl, as well as the cosmological scale of the quantities mPl and wPl, thus emphasizing the genetic closeness of numerological relations (5) and (6) to the above representation (16).
It thus becomes clear why the efforts still being made [7вҖ“9] to relate the apparent
vacuum energy density пҒҘ	пҖҪ пҒҢc4 / 8пҒ° G , determined by the cosmological constant, to the
energy density parameters пҒҘ	пҖҪ E 4	/(2пҒ° hc)3 of the quantum electrodynamics vacuum (for
QCD	QCD
definiteness, we use here EQCD = mQc2), or to the Planck energy density пҒҘ	пҖҪ c7 / 8hG2 , have
proved unsuccessful. In their estimates, the authors of the above-mentioned works directed their attention toward the quantum chromodynamics vacuum, whereas the determinative contribution to the cosmological essence of the пҒҢ-term comes from the electromagnetic component of the unified physical vacuum. Incidentally, one of the Planck parameters, namely,
the Planck power wPl, was actually used (relation (9)) in making this inference. The relations presented below, obtained with the use of relations (10), (14), and (15a), explain the inference made, thereby revealing the cosmological nature of the smallness of the proportionality coefficients of the energy densities used in [7вҖ“9]:


пҒҘVe
пҖҪ пҒ—V

пҒҘ tot
пҖҪ 3пғ— 2пҖӯ 32 пҒ—
3
aQ пҒҘ
RH


QCD
пӮ» 5 пғ—10пҖӯ42 пҒҘ


QCD
,	(17)

7 2	пғҰ aQ пғ¶
пҖӯ122

пҒҘVe пҖҪ 3 пғ— 2  пҒ° пҒ—V пғ§ R пғ· пҒҘ Pl пӮ» 2.2 пғ—10	пҒҘ Pl .	(18)
пғЁ  H пғё
The entire set of expressions (15a), (16) demonstrate the heuristic validity of representation
(14) for the Planck constant. Possibly, all the above relations may become a phenomenological guideline for the future theory of physical vacuum, incorporating as a natural fragment, a theory of quantum gravitation.

PHYSICAL VACUUM MANIFESTATIONS IN VARIOUS PERIODS IN THE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE

The Planckian source model has not only made it possible to relate the value of one of the Planck parameters вҖ“ the Planck power вҖ“ to the apparent value of the density of dark energy that is being associated with the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum and abandon the physically little comprehensible idea of antigravity in the dynamics of the Universe, but to also open up the possibility to understand in a non-contradictory manner a number of other cosmological problems pertaining to the elucidation of the reasons for the differences in the dynamics of the Universe between different epochs. To clarify such problems within the scope of general phenomenology, it will be necessary to introduce notions of the possible
dependences of the world constants G, h , and c on the Hubble parameter H = tвҖ“1, where t is the

age of the Universe, or on the corresponding dimensionless variable h(t) = Рқ/Рқ0, where Рқ0 is the value of the Hubble parameter in our epoch.
When discussing such possibilities, one should first of all direct oneвҖҷs attention toward the result on the practically negligible value (~ 0.6пӮҙ10вҖ“6) of the relative change пҒ„пҒЎe/пҒЎe of the fine structure constant пҒЎe = e2/пҒЁc пӮ» 1/137 for those regions of the Universe, which are characterized by red shifts of z > 0.4 [40]. The arguments presented above in favor of the natural connection between the Planck power and the Schwartzshild solution and the formation of the total energy content of the Universe in the system of Friedmann equations gives grounds to treat wPl = c5/2G as one more, in addition to пҒЎe, combination of world constants independent of the age HвҖ“1 of the Universe.
For subsequent qualitative estimations, we will simplify still more the situation and take it that the local energy content пҒҘtot and the elementary charge e are independent of H. In that case, it follows from the definition of пҒЎe, expression (6) for wPl, and relations (10), (14), and (15a) that

c(t) пҖҪ c0
пғ— h(t) 3 ,
G(t)
пҖҪ G0
10
h(t) 3 ,
h(t) пҖҪ h 0
пғ— h(t)пҖӯ 23 ,
mQ (t) пҖҪ mQ0
пғ— h(t)пҖӯ139 ,
пҒЎ g (t) пҖҪ пҒЎ g0
пғ— h(t) 9
(19)

where the subscript вҖң0вҖқ indicates quantities corresponding to the present-day epoch. The assumptions made are adequate for qualitative discussion of various problems facing modern technology, as demonstrated by the examples presented below.


Specificities of the Dynamics of the Universe at the early Stages of its Evolution

One of the problems before present-day cosmology pertains to the understanding of reasons why the specific energy density of the most powerful energy sources originated at the early stages of the evolution of the Universe had been substantially higher (by up to a thousand times! [41]) than the corresponding quantities observed for subsequent epochs. It had been just the early stages of the evolution of the Universe, characterized by red shifts of z пҒҫ 1 and more, at which quasars had originated and gamma-ray bursts made their appearance. According to ZelвҖҷdovich and Novikov [42], largely responsible for the formation of the far-infrared and submillimeter radiation background fixed today, whose total energy is comparable with the total optical radiation background, are hundreds of individual sources with z вүҘ 1.2, associated with the formation of stars and galaxies, which can be resolved with the aid of modern equipment. The existence of powerful energy sources of this type in the subsequent stages of the evolution of the Universe was not fixed.
Such differences in the character of formation of stars and powerful energy sources at the early stages of the evolution of the Universe are linked in the standard model [7вҖ“9] to the relatively high proportion of energy density accounted for in these early epochs by вҖңordinaryвҖқ (luminous) matter, пҒҘb, and dark matter, пҒҘbm, compared to the density пҒҘV of dark energy, so that ОөV
< Оөm = Оөdm + Оөb. Since it is assumed in this case that the energy densities Оөdm and Оөb naturally decrease with increasing volume of the Universe, while the quantity ОөV remains unchanged [7вҖ“9], the total energy density пҒҘtot = пҒҘm + пҒҘV that had occurred at the early stages of the evolution of the Universe had to exceed the quantity пҒҘtot for the later stages, thus making for intense star formation processes [7, 43].
Within the framework of the notions being developed, with the total energy density пҒҘtot remaining the same, it is natural to link the intense star formation at the early stages of the evolution of the Universe, characterized by high H values, to the other values of the вҖңworld constantsвҖқ, which had occurred in those epochs, as follows from relations (19). The abnormally high specific formation density of the most powerful energy sources at the early stages of the

evolution of the Universe should be first of all associated with the higher, according to relation (19), specific gravitation constant Оұg. It can also be assumed that the more intense formation of stars and quasi-star systems had been facilitated, according to relation (19), by the higher values of the velocity of light, c, and also the lower values of the Planck constant h . Indeed, higher c values allow for high velocities and kinetic energies of moving masses, while at low values of
the Planck constant h the extent of limitations on quantum transitions is reduced, which manifests itself as an increase in the phase volume in the probability calculations for the processes.
One can also point out the obviously lower contribution from the effects of polarization of the physical vacuum in the course of relativistic motion of matter with respect to the base medium at the early stages of evolution of the dynamics of the Universe, for, according to relations (19), the velocity of light, c(t), at the time had been higher, which had allowed for substantially higher вҖңpre-relativisticвҖқ speeds of recession of material objects in accordance with the Hubble law. Thus, the proportion of the component пҒҘdm in the total energy density пҒҘtot had been lower, so that the contribution from the вҖңnon-relativisticвҖқ baryonic component пҒҘb had increased noticeably, provided that the quantity пҒҘV remained unchanged. This possibility is indirectly confirmed by the inferences that вҖңdark matterвҖқ had been absent at the pre-galactic stages of the evolution of the Universe, some 100вҖ“200 millions of years following the Big Bang [44]. Obviously as the velocity c(t) decreases with the age of the Universe in conditions of time common to the entire Universe the вҖңpre-relativisticвҖқ speeds of recession of material objects, including gas-dust components, formed at the early evolution stages and вҖңfrozen inвҖқ to the physical vacuum can become relativistic. This will lead to corresponding changes in the polarization regions of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum in the neighborhood of these objects, which govern the relativistic increase of their inertial masses, and hence to the appearance of the пҒҘdm component in the total energy density пҒҘtot. It can be assumed that it is precisely evolutional changes of this type in the dynamics of the Universe that are responsible for the relatively high contribution (23% in our epoch, see Sect. 3) of вҖңdark matterвҖқ to the total energy balance of the Universe. The analysis presented, which has made it possible to naturally resolve the mystery of dark matter by linking the origination of this substance to the relativistic growth of the energy of that portion of matter, which had been formed at the early stages of the evolution of the Universe, in the subsequent epochs, can be considered an argument in favor of FeynmanвҖҷs position [14] as to the relativistic growth of the inertial mass of a particle with its increasing velocity. It cannot be ruled out that while the masses originated at the early epochs of the evolution of the Universe had turned into relativistic ones, there had not arisen some gas flows forming halos around such galactic clusters. To elucidate such halos, provided that they had arisen, it is of interest to conduct investigations into possible differences between вҖңdark matterвҖқ manifestations occurring at different stages of its formation.

Possible Causes of the Anomalies in the Energy Releases of Type Ia Supernovae in Remote Galaxies
Within the scope of the phenomenological model of the dynamics of the Universe under consideration, one can comprehend possible reasons for the reduction of the energy releases fixed upon outbursts of Type Ia supernovae in galaxies far away from us (over 4 billions of light years) [45], as compared with the expected ones. Such supernovae are usually considered вҖңstandard candles of the UniverseвҖқ, the energy release upon their outbursts being quite definite. It were just the anomalies detected which formed the basis for the inferences drawn within the framework of the standard model [7вҖ“9] that the expansion of the Universe at red shifts of z > 0.76, when its size had not exceeded 0.57 of the size in our epoch, had taken its course with lower velocities than it occurs in our time. Moreover, according to the standard model [7вҖ“9], later on the expansion velocity had only to grow higher because of the natural reduction of the

relative contribution пҒҘm of the mass components (see below) against the background of the invariable energy density пҒҘV of вҖңblack matterвҖқ that brings вҖңantigravityвҖқ into effect.
To analyze the data available on the energy releases of Type Ia supernovae in remote
galaxies [7, 89, 45], we consider the relationship between the luminosity distance DL(z) and the red shift z, with due regard for the function c(H) introduced above (see relations (19)). The quantity DL(z) is defined as the path traversed by light emitted at the instant te by a source located at a distance of r from the coordinate origin r = 0 at which the observer is situated that fixes the emitted light at the instant t0 [7, 46]. By definition, the red shift is given by

z пҖҪ пҒ® e пҖӯпҒ® o
пҒ® o
пҖҪ a(t0 ) пҖӯ 1 .	(20)
a(te )

Here пҒ®e and пҒ®0 are the frequencies of light emitted by the stellar source and received by the observer, respectively, and a(te) and a(t0) are the вҖңsizesвҖқ of the Universe at the instants te Рё t0. The path covered by light, which is determined by the totality of displacements of its wave front along the geodetic line for metric in a homogeneous Euclidean space, with due
consideration given for its lengthening by (1 + z) times owing to the expansion of the Universe, is represented in the form [47]
t0 c[a(t)]dt

DL (z) пҖҪ (1 пҖ« z)a(t0 )пғІ
te
a(t)
,	(21)

where relationship is introduced between the velocity of light and the current size of the Universe. Having made the substitution of variable
пҒё пҖҪ a(t0 ) пҖӯ 1;	dпҒё пҖҪ пҖӯ a(t0 ) da dt;	1  da пҖҪ H (пҒё )
/	/	/

a(t)
a2 (t) dt
a(t) dt

and a number of transformations, with due regard for relation (19), we get
z c(пҒё )	пҖЁ1 пҖ« zпҖ©c z	dпҒё

DL (z) пҖҪ (1 пҖ« z)пғІ H (пҒё )
dпҒё пҖҪ
0
2
H0 3	0
.	(22)

In the absence of relation (19), when СҒ(Рқ) = СҒ0, the corresponding expression has the form
z  dпҒё
L	0 пғІ H (пҒё )

D0 (z) пҖҪ (1 пҖ« z) c
0
.	(22Р°)

Since the function Рқ = Рқ(z) increases with increasing z, relationship (22) between the luminosity distance and the red shift proves a more rapidly increasing function than standard relation (22a) that is defined at c(H) = c0 and actually leads to the underrating of the true distance to the light source cosmological distances away. And it is exactly this fact that can help gain a qualitative insight into the nature of the apparent reduction of the energy release of
Type Ia supernovae in remote galaxies, as compared with the standard values fixed in near galaxies. The making of a quantitative analysis of the pertinent relationships is complicated by the fact that direct information on the dependence c(z) in faraway galaxies is difficult to obtain, because the integrand in the expression for the luminosity distance includes the combination c(z)/H(z). The last circumstance aggravates the problem of reliable determination of cosmological distances, rather difficult as it is. Nevertheless, the analysis made shows the principal possibility that the reasons for the anomalies fixed in the energy releases of Type Ia supernovae in remote galaxies can be comprehended on the basis of the hypothesis being developed that the world constants depend on the age of the Universe, without resort being made to the assumptions of accelerated expansion of the Universe in the later epochs, as follows from the standard model.
To conclude this section, let us present one more corollary to relations (19) that explains the physical meaning of the phenomenological Hubble relation (11), which is, in the authorвҖҷs opinion, difficult to comprehend within the scope of the standard model of the

evolution of the Universe [7вҖ“9]. Considering relations (19), the Hubble вҖңradius of the UniverseвҖқ, RH(t), represented as a limiting form of expression (11), is
2

RH (t) пҖҪ
c(t)
пғҰ
пҖҪ c0t пғ§
пғ¶ 3
пғ·	пҖҪ c0t0 3t
1
3 ,	(23)

H (t)
пғЁ H0 пғё

where t0 is the age of the Universe in our epoch. This relation means that the volume VU(t) of
the Universe increases in proportion to time, VU(t) ~ R 3 ~ t, in accordance with relation (9)
showing linear in time increase of the total energy content of the Universe as a result of the action of the Planckian source. Thus, the Hubble law simply reflects the constancy of the average energy density in the expanding Universe, realized under the effect of the Planckian source. Note also the reduction of the extension rate of the вҖңradius of the UniverseвҖқ with its
age, RЛҷ (t) ~ t пҖӯ 23 , in contrast to the above-indicated inference of the standard model of the
dynamics of the Universe.

PHYSICAL VACUUM IN INTERNUCLEAR INTERACTIONS. DO вҖңNUCLEAR MOLECULESвҖқ ACTUALLY EXIST?
To append the notions being developed as to the role of the Casimir effects in the generation of nuclear forces, consider the hypothesis that вҖңnuclear moleculesвҖқ, bound collections of individual nuclei spaced apart at ~ 10 fermi (10вҖ“12 cm) вҖ“ distances an order of magnitude greater than those on the characteristic вҖңnuclearвҖқ scales, could be formed under the effect of the Casimir forces. The particle di-neutron can be of interest as the object of such an inquiry.
The question as to the existence of a di-neutron as a stable particle has its 50 odd yearsвҖҷ history. The detection of a stable di-neutron was reported in a number of works, but in the subsequent ones these results were called in question. In particular, Sakisaka and Tomita [48], who studied the process T(d, 2n)3He using the reaction 27Al(2n, пҒ§)29Al to detect the 2n particles, concluded that a stable di-neutron was formed with a binding energy of пҒҘdn ~ 3 MeV. However, Katase and co-authors [49], whose work appeared soon afterwards and presented the results of a similar experiment, reported that the yield of 29Al attesting the actual existence of 2n was only at the background level.
It is also important to note here that there exist arguments negating the principal possibility of existence of a stable di-neutron. Since the neuron-proton system has a bound state вҖ“ deuteron вҖ“ with a binding energy of пҒҘD = 2.22 MeV and a spin of S = 1 and also a virtual level with an energy of 70 keV and a spin of S = 0, a system of two neutrons can have, by virtue of the charge independence of nuclear forces (isotopic invariance), only a virtual state with a spin of S = 0 [50], wherein a weak repulsion must occur, while the state with a spin of S
= 1 cannot exist there by virtue of the Pauli principle. Indeed, the value found for the virtual level of a pair of neutrons coincides within the accuracy of experiment (~20%) with the above-indicated value for the virtual level in the n-p system, which allows one to draw inferences about the validity of the charge invariance hypothesis for nuclear forces and the impossibility
of existence of a stable 2n particle. ZelвҖҷdovich and co-workers [50] have also presented the upper estimate of the formation cross-section for a stable di-neutron, пҒі < 0.0001вҖ“0.01 mb, which practically excludes the possibility of its formation in any experiments.
Despite the inference presented above, starting in the nineties of the last century, the notions of the existence of a stable di-neutron began to be used in the analysis of nuclear chemistry transformations under conditions of electrochemical experiments [51, 52] in the search for energy sources using вҖңcold fusionвҖқ. Though the achievement of practical results was reported in individual works on cold fusion [52], skepticism is maintained here on the whole, which partly owes to the absence of works on direct detection of a stable di-neutron. Manifestations of the di-neutron as a stable particle were indirectly indicated by the results of the analysis [53] of the background spectra of germanium gamma spectrometers, obtained during space satellite

experiments under the TGRS [54], INTEGRAL [55], and HEAO-3 [56] Projects. Subject to detection were the gamma lines of the various isotopes formed under irradiation by Solar wind streams in the material of the cryostats of these spectrometers, which contained, in particular, the stable isotopes 27Al, 57Fe, 61Ni, 73Ge, and 109Ag. The analysis of the entire collection of spectra available made it possible to conclude that under solar irradiation conditions the above isotopes participated in processes involving the formation of the unstable isotopes 29Al, 59Fe, 63Ni, 75Ge and 111Ag, which could point to the prsence of stable 2n particles in Solar wind streams. It should be noted here that though the upper estimate [50] presented above for the formation of 2n practically excludes such a possibility, the results of the recent work by Borzakov and co-authors
[18] afford a basis for continuing research along these lines. The upper estimate obtained in this
work for the formation cross-section of a stable di-neutron (with a binding energy of 2.67 < пҒҘdn < 3.01 MeV) in the process n + d пӮ® 2n + p was пҒі < 0.2 mb, which is two orders of magnitude greater than that indicated in [50]. The upper limit on the binding energy of the di-neutron in
[18] was selected such that the deuteron remained stable (because of the impossibility of free
electron capture in the reaction e + d пӮ® 2n + ОҪ). It should also be noted that the di-neutron proves unstable in the sense of decay into two protons and two electrons if пҒҘdn < 1.56 MeV. Nevertheless, since there is no information in the literature about any experiments pointing to the existence of the di-neutron as a stable particle with a definite binding energy, the question as to the existence of a stable di-neutron should still be considered an open question.
At the same time, it was reliably established [57] that in the neutron-excess nuclei 6He, 11Li, and 14Be there existed correlated pairs of вҖңvalenceвҖқ neutrons that bind to the core, thus forming a di-neutron вҖңhaloвҖқ. The formation of strongly correlated neutron pairs was fixed in the course of decay of the excited neutron-excess nuclei 8He, 11Li, 14Be, and 17B [58] formed in the reactions (ПҖвҖ“, ПҖ+) and (ПҖвҖ“, p), which also pointed to the possibility of formation of a di-neutron cluster in the core field of such nuclei. A correlated di-neutron pair was also formed upon decay of the excited state 6He(2+) produced in the reaction 7Li(d, 3He)6He* [59]. Aleksandrov and co-authors [60] suggested that in the correlated di-neutron pair produced in the reaction Рў(d, 3He)2n* there could form excited decaying states with the energies Р•* = 3.6 MeV and Р•* ~ 11.8 MeV that could be characterized as the rotational lines 2+ and 4+, respectively. The estimate obtained in this work for the вҖңradiusвҖқ of such a di-neutron was adn ~ 8пӮҙ10вҖ“13 cm (8 fermi). The pronounced correlation of neutron, as well as proton pairs in accordance with isotopic invariance manifests itself in the capture reactions involving two nucleons (t, p) and (3He, n), the predominant contribution to the process being determined by the transfer of a nucleon pair with a relative orbital moment of l = 2 [61].
While the formation of a di-neutron вҖңhaloвҖқ or transfer of a di-nucleon pair in a direct
nuclear process can be represented in model form [57], the possibility of formation of a bound or a quasi-bound free pair of identical nucleons with a relative separation of dnn ~ 10 fermi, i.e., a вҖңnuclear moleculeвҖқ of sorts, cannot be comprehended in representations using the standard intranuclear potentials. To understand, at least at the qualitative level, the results obtained by Aleksandrov and co-authors [60], we will refuse below to consider a system of two neutrons
bound by the well-known nuclear potentials. We will assume that a pair of neutrons rotating relative to each other and spaced a distance of dnn ~ 10 fermi apart make up a stable formation occupying in space a certain volume wherein can take place amplification of the frequencies fnn
~ c/dnn of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum. In accordance with the results of Sect. 2, one can introduce for such a pair a вҖңCasimirвҖқ-type potential energy of Udn:

Udn (r ) пҖҪ пҖӯпҒ§ dn r
пҖ«	h2
2mnn
r 2 l(l пҖ« 1) ,	(3b)

where пҒ§dn is a dimensionless parameter characterizing the intensity of the вҖңmolecularвҖқ interaction introduced, mnn = mn/2 is the reduced mass of the neutron pair, and mn is the neutron mass. It is important to note that considered here are not the nuclear forces realized in nuclear matter, but the initial, вҖңseedingвҖқ nuclear forces. The hypothesis of the charge
invariance of nuclear forces, whose essence is, as might be assumed, associated with the dynamics of nuclear matter and nucleon exchange between пҒ°-mesons, do not apply to such forces. Since the exclusion indicated in [50] for the existence of a stable di-neutron as a nuclear molecule is removed, experimental search for a stable di-neutron, the possibility of whose existence is still indicated by a number of experimental facts (see, e.g., Ref. No. [53]), would be of special interest.
Using as before the well-known solution of the appropriate SchrГ¶dinger equation (Ref. No. [28], pp. 146вҖ“150), we represent the expression for the energy levels Edn(n, l) of a discrete spectrum at a potential energy of (3b) in the form
2 m c2
Edn (n,l) пҖҪ пҖӯпҒ§ dn  n   ,	n вүҘ l + 1   ,	(4b) 4n2
where n is the principal quantum number. The corresponding expression for the mean distance ddn between the neutrons in the di-neutron under consideration has in this case the form (Ref. No. [28], p. 150)
3hn2 пғ©	l(l пҖ« 1) пғ№
ddn пҖҪ пҒ§  m c пғӘ1 пҖӯ	3n2  пғә .	(24)
dn  n  пғ«	пғ»
If we assume that the internuclear distances realized in вҖңnuclear moleculesвҖқ are dnn ~ 10вҖ“12 cm, the characteristic interaction constant values should exceed пҒ§dn ~ 0.05. For estimation purposes, we take пҒ§dn = 0.14, which is an order of magnitude smaller than the strong interaction constant
пҒЎs. If a stable di-neutron with a binding energy of пҒҘdn = вҖ“Edn(n, l) does actually exist and its ground state is characterized by the parameters l = 0 and n = 1, we then get from expressions (4b) and (24) Оөdn = 2.76 MeV and dnn = 0.43пӮҙ10 вҖ“12 cm = 4.3 fermi, respectively. Taking l = 2 and n = 3 for the excited state of such a di-neutron, we have from expressions (4b) and (24) Оө*dn
= 0.31 MeV and d*nn = 3.01пӮҙ10 вҖ“12 cm = 30.1 fermi. It should be noted that such a di-neuron in
the ground state must be a stable particle (the condition Оөdn < 1.56 MeV is satisfied) and must
decay according to 2n пӮ® n пҖ« p пҖ« eпҖӯ пҖ«пҒ®~ in the excited state. However, the half-life of such a state
can exceed that of a free neutron (614 s) because the mass of the decaying particle is less than that of two free neutrons by the magnitude of the binding energy and also because of the lesser phase volume allowed for a process involving formation of four particles.
In connection with the notions being developed, let us consider in more detail the results obtained by Aleksandrov and co-authors [60] on the appearance in the di-neutron pair formed in the reaction Рў(d, 3He)2n of вҖңresonancesвҖқ with rotational moments l = 2 and l = 4 corresponding to energy levels of a few megaelectronvolts. Determined in this reaction, with the target in the form of a tritium-saturated titanium foil exposed to a beam of deuterons with an energy of Ed = 31 MeV, were the energy spectra of the 3He ions, measured at different angles ranging from 6 to 13пӮ° in the laboratory system of reference. In the вҖңhardвҖқ part of the spectra there appeared an intense peak associated with the correlated escape of free neutrons, while in the вҖңsoftвҖқ region there was a broad maximum shifting toward lower energies of the 3He ions with increasing angle of measurement. It is obvious that the nature of the resonances postulated in the above-mentioned work [60] cannot be comprehended on the basis of the analysis of the standard
nuclear forces, both because of the centrifugal repulsion of neutrons at the rotational moments
indicated above and as a result of the relatively large distances (~ 10 fermi) between the neutrons in such pairs. As shown by calculations using various nuclear force models [62], and also as already noted earlier, in a system of two free nucleons there can exist only virtual levels making

for some repulsive interaction between the nucleons, these levels lying near the decay threshold of the nucleon pair.
However, the introduction of notions of manifestation of the Casimir forces in the di-neutron system and formation of a 2n molecule provides a basis for a qualitative comprehension of the character of the energy spectrum of the 3He ion and its variation with the angle of measurement, considering that in the reaction Рў(d, 3He)2n there are formed both a free pair of neutrons and stable 2n molecules (вҖңdi-neutronsвҖқ) in the ground (l = 2) and excited (l = 4) states.
It should be borne in mind, too, that the 2n molecules brought into consideration should be characterized by relatively large cross-sections for interaction with matter because of their abnormally great, for nuclear objects, size (~ 10 fermi) and can decay into neutrons directly in the target вҖ“ the tritium-saturated titanium foil, which excludes the possibility of direct detection of the 2n molecules with the experimental setup being as it is. The last circumstance, however,
should not affect the formation of the energy spectrum of 3He measured experimentally with different angles пҒұ of detection of this ion with respect to the direction of the incident deuteron beam in the laboratory coordinate system. At the same time, the very fact of formation of вҖңdi-neutronsвҖқ in the states with l = 2 and l = 4 substantially affects, as will be demonstrated below, the variation of the spectrum of the 3He ion with increasing angle пҒұпҖ®
To this end, we make a most simple model calculation of the energy spectrum of the nuclei of the 3He ions, formed in the process Рў(d, 3He)2n, using the formalism of the diagram theory of direct nuclear reactions developed by I.S. Shapiro and co-workers [61]. To arrive at qualitative conclusions about the character of variation of the spectrum of 3He, we simplify the problem by formally associating with the di-neutron 2n a rotational moment (вҖңspinвҖқ) of Sdn = 2 and neglecting the spins of the other particles taking part in the reaction. We will represent this process as a virtual decay of the original tritium nucleus to form a di-neutron and a virtual proton, T вҶ’ 2n + p, followed by the virtual capture of this proton by an oncoming deuteron to
form the nucleus of 3He, p + d вҶ’ 3He. We use the following notation: i вҖ“ tritium (T), f вҖ“ di-neutron (2n), a вҖ“ deuteron (d), b вҖ“ helium-3 (3He), and c вҖ“ proton (p). It should be noted here that because of the introduction of a вҖңspinвҖқ for the di-neutron, a spherical function with an orbital
momentum of l = 2 should be introduced into the total vertex function characterizing the virtual
process T вҶ’ 2n + p. The corresponding differential cross-section of the process i вҶ’ f, with the kinetic energy Eb of the nucleus of 3He emitted within a solid angle of dпҒ—b (characterized by the

angle Оё with respect to the direction of the momentum pa
of the original deuteron of kinetic
вҶ’

energy Ea interacting with the resting nucleus of T) being fixed in the laboratory system ( pi пҖҪ 0 ,

where
вҶ’
p j is the momentum of the jth particle), is represented in the following form:

d 3пҒі
пҒӣF (q )пҒқ2 пҒӣP (z)пҒқ2 пҒӣF (q
)пҒқ2

if	~ A
dпҒ— dE	пғ©
2	fc	2
0	ca
.	(25)
пғ№ 2

b	b	пғӘE пҖ« mb E
пҖ« mc Q
пҖӯ 2
пғ— cosпҒұ пғә

пғ«	ma
ca
a	пғ»

Here mj is the mass of the jth particle, Qca пҖҪ пҖЁmc пҖ« ma пҖӯ m пҖ©c2 , and

P (z) пҖҪ  1 пҖЁ3z2 пҖӯ 1пҖ©,
z пҖҪ
.	(26)

2	2
The expressions for the form factors F2(qfc) and F0(qca) characterizing the virtual processes T вҶ’
2n + p Рё p + d вҶ’ 3He have the form [61]

F (q
пғ©пғҰ
) пҖҪ пғӘпғ§1 пҖ«	пҖ«
пғ¶
пғ· пғ— q
j (q R
пғҰ
) пҖӯ пғ§1 пҖ«
пғ¶
пғ· пғ— j (q
пғ№
R )пғә пғ— R
expпҖЁпҖӯ пҒ«
R )пҖ©,

2	fc
пғ§
пғ«пғЁ	fc
Rfc
fc Rfc	пғ·
fc 1
fc  fc	пғ§
пғЁ
пҒ« fc
пғ·	2
fc пғё
fc  fc пғәпғ»	fc
fc  fc

пғҰ	пҒ«ca	пғ¶

F0 (qca ) пҖҪ пғ§ cosпҖЁqca Rca пҖ©пҖ«
пғЁ	qca
sinпҖЁqca Rca пҖ©пғ· пғ— expпҖЁпҖӯ пҒ«ca Rca пҖ©;	(27)
пғё

пҒ«	пҖҪ  1
; пҒ«	пҖҪ  1
; m  пҖҪ
mk ml
; Q	пҖҪ пҖЁm
пҖ« m пҖӯ m пҖ©c2 .	(28)

fc	h
ca	h
/
k пҖ« ml
f	c	i

Here Rfc and Rca are the radii of the respective reaction channels [61], j1(x) and j2(x) are spherical Bessel functions of the first and the second kind, respectively [62], and

/	пғҰ p	p пғ¶
пғ©	пғҰ	m
1
пғ¶пғ№ 2

q	пҖҪ m пғ§   f  пҖӯ   c  пғ· пҖҪ p ,	q	пҖҪ пғӘ2m пғ§ E
пҖ«   a  E
пҖӯ 2
пғ— cosпҒұ пғ·пғә
and

fc	fc пғ§ m	m пғ·	f	fc
b	b	m	a

пғЁ	f	c пғё
/	пғҰ p	p пғ¶	/	m
пғӘпғ«	пғЁ	b
пғ© m2 пғҰ	m
пғёпғәпғ»
1
пғ¶пғ№ 2

qca пҖҪ mca пғ§   c  пҖӯ   a  пғ· пҖҪ pa пҖӯ   a  pb ,	qca пҖҪ пғӘ2   a  пғ§ Eb пҖ«   b  Ea пҖӯ 2
пғ— cosпҒұ пғ·пғә
(29)

пғ§ m	m пғ·	m	m	m

пғЁ	c	a пғё	b
пғӘпғ«	b пғЁ
a
пғёпғәпғ»

are the relative momenta of particles in the vertex form factors F2(qfc) and F0(qca) and the magnitudes of these momenta.
When analyzing the possible contribution from relations (25)вҖ“(29) to the energy spectrum of 3He, one should first of all bear in mind that in the given laboratory system of reference qfc = pf this contribution is extremely small ([F2(qfc)]2 ~ (pf Rfc)4 << 1) if the momenta pf transferred are small. For this reason, the determinative role is in this case assigned to the process involving the formation of the di-neutron in the ground state. The expression for the differential cross-section of this process in the case of small momenta transferred is formally obtained from
relation (25) by making the replacement [F2(qfc)]2 [P2(qfc)]2 пӮ® [F0(qfc)]2. In the case of great transferred momenta, the вҖңdi-neutronвҖқ contribution (25) increases and can become determinative in the region of relatively low energies of the 3He ions being detected, as the angle of measurement, Оё, is increased, which agrees with the relationships observed by Aleksandrov and co-workers [60]. It is not very difficult to ascertain that a similar model consideration of the possibility of formation of вҖңdi-neutronsвҖқ in the excited state with a rotational moment of l = 4
adds to the above inference. The estimation presented only demonstrates the principal possibility to comprehend the above results [60] in the context of notions of a stable di-neutron as a вҖңnuclear moleculeвҖқ.
How much can the вҖңCasimirвҖқ interactions at distances of ~ 10вҖ“12 cm combine individual atoms into associates of the type under consideration, so that nuclear molecules can exist? Obviously it is only properly organized experimental investigations that can help to answer this question. In connection with the above-mentioned attempts at finding a stable di-neutron, attention should also be paid to the possibility of studying its formation in the processes n + d пӮ® 2n + p and Оі + d пӮ® 2n + e+ + ОҪ. It is evident that the formation of a positron in the latter reaction will make it possible to isolate the contribution from this process against the background of the
well-known deuteron photodecomposition process, provided that the energy EпҒ§ of the gamma-quanta used in the experiment will exceed the deuteron photodecomposition threshold (2.22 MeV). It should be noted that if the existence of a di-neuron as a stable structure is confirmed, this fact will stimulate the search for fresh solutions to the problems facing thermonuclear power
generation using such processes as d + 2n пӮ® 4Рқ + Оі, 4Рқ + e+ пӮ® 4РқРө + пҒ®~ , d + 2n пӮ® 4РқРө + eвҖ“ +
пҒ®~ , 6Li + 2n пӮ® 3Рқ + 5РқРө, 6Li + 2n пӮ® 3Рқ + 4РқРө + n, etc.
As far as the formation of вҖңnuclear moleculesвҖқ is concerned, the search for a bound 3n system [63] can also be of interest. Previously, while studying the processes (Рҗn, xn) involving stable multiple-neutron structures Рҗn, Detraz [64] made a negative inference about the existence
of such a system, as well as a stable di-neutron 2n. The Рҗn particles (where A = 4вҖ“8) were supposedly formed upon irradiation of a tungsten target with protons 24 BeV in energy and thereafter induced nuclear processes in a 70Zn target, which could be inferred from the aggregate

of products formed therein. No nuclear reactions involving 2n or 3n were detected, though such particles could also be formed under the given experimental conditions [64]. It can be assumed that the last result owes to a great cross-section for the decomposition of the 2n and 3n вҖңmoleculesвҖқ in the course of passage of the Рҗn particles through the preliminary aluminum filter primarily intended to capture all the charged particles formed, in addition to Рҗn, upon interaction of high-energy protons with the tungsten target.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The main objective of this investigation was to establish the possibility of considering the physical vacuum as a unified system governing the processes taking place in the micro- and the macroworld, which manifests itself on all space-time scales, from subnuclear to cosmological. The physical vacuum appears in this case as a substance that unites and forms all the known types of interaction вҖ“ strong, electromagnetic, weak, and gravitational. The notions developed here made it possible to qualitatively resolve some of the debatable problems of the standard theory of the dynamics of the Universe and also to pose a number of fundamental questions concerning the physical essence of nuclear forces and gravitational interactions.
The approaches suggested in this work to the solution of urgent astrophysical problems are actually a further development of the steady state theory of the expanding Universe [65вҖ“68], according to which fresh matter is being constantly created during the course of this expansion. In contrast to the models suggested in the above works, the phenomenological Planckian source model under consideration has to do with the generation of not only the baryonic component of matter, but also of the entire energy of the Universe, including вҖңdark energyвҖқ. Moreover, since it is assumed that the Planckian source had originated as the final phase of the inflatory stage of the Big Bang, it had been exactly the action of such a source at the early stages of evolution, characterized by the formation of a homogeneous and superdense Universe with the вҖңhottestвҖқ photons, that had to cause generation of the cosmic microwave background (вҖңrelictвҖқ) radiation detected in our epoch, which reflects the history of cooling of the highest-energy вҖңprimaryвҖқ photons [69]. It should be noted that it were precisely the difficulties encountered in analyzing fluctuations of the relict radiation within the framework of the вҖңsteady stateвҖқ model, as well as the impossibility to comprehend the above-discussed differences in specific energy density between energy sources originated at the early and the subsequent stages of the evolution of the Universe, that were the reason behind the non-acceptance of the models [65вҖ“68] providing for energy-mass generation. It can be assumed that the Plnackian source model suggested in this work, which clears up the above-mentioned difficulties, will allow the very idea that energy-mass is being constantly introduced into the evolving Universe to be somewhat вҖңrehabilitatedвҖқ.
From this standpoint, it would be of interest to present quantitative comparisons between the corollaries of the given phenomenological model and the results of the latest investigations
[70] (see also Ref. No. [71]) into the specific features of вҖңcompactвҖқ massive galaxies formed at the early stages of the evolution of the Universe, up to 3 billions of years following the Big Bang. Wel and co-workers [70] analyzed 14 such compact galaxies containing approximately the same number of stars as the completely formed galaxies in the вҖңmore recentвҖқ regions of the Universe. However, the sizes of the compact galaxies were four-five times smaller, and their densities, tens of times higher than those of their present-day counterparts. The investigatorsвҖҷ attention was paid to the principal difference between the disk-type shape of the compact galaxies and the spherical shape of the вҖңpresent-dayвҖқ galaxies of the same great masses. And while the speed of rotation of the Sun about the center of our galaxy is 230 km/s, the corresponding estimates for the вҖңrotating disksвҖқ of the compact galaxies yield 700 km/s. Questions naturally arise as to the reasons for such cardinal differences in structure and dynamics between galaxies of approximately the same mass, but formed in different epochs of the evolution of the Universe. It would also be of interest to perform computer simulations of the

processes of formation of stars and galaxies in conditions of continuous production of energy-mass by the Planckian source, with phenomenological consideration being made for the temporal changes of the world constants in different epochs of evolution of the Universe in accordance with relations (19).
It is the authorвҖҷs opinion that the further search for the possibilities of obtaining direct experimental information on the magnitudes of the world constants and those of the various energy density components of the Universe at different values of the red shift z can be considered as one of the cosmological problems of current importance. Such information could have been obtained from direct measurements of the Lamb shift [2, 72] in atomic hydrogen spectra in remote galaxies [71], because the energy difference пҒӨE between the 2S1/2 and 2P1/2 states of the hydrogen atom, due to quantum fluctuations of the electromagnetic component of the physical vacuum, proves dependent, considering relations (19) and (22), on H:
1
пҒӨE пҖҪ 0.41пҒЎ 5 пғ— m c2 пҖҪ пҒӨE пғ— пғҰ H0 пғ¶ 9 ,	(30)
e	e	0  пғ§	пғ·
пғЁ	пғё
where ОҙE0 is the magnitude of the Lamb shift in our epoch (corresponds to a frequency of 1050 MHz). It should also be noted that the analysis of such effects in galaxies observed at various values of H = H(z) could have also made it possible to find out how much are the above-introduced relations (19) justified.
The objective of any phenomenological approach it is to unite the variety of the experimental information available and represent the interrelations revealed in the form of expressions of definite physical meaning involving physically comprehensible parameters that can be determined experimentally. The phenomenological relationships and parameters being introduced can form the basis for constructing physical models of the various manifestations of the dynamics of the Universe.
Of course, the main mystery of the Universe is still its base medium вҖ“ the QED-vacuum, and the accumulation of fresh information about its manifestations is a high-priority task. A possible avenue of inquiry along these lines can also be associated with the realization of the results of the experiments tracing back to the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiment and the analysis of the Bell-LГ©ger inequalities [74вҖ“78] concerned with the verification of the fundamental principles of quantum mechanics. The fixing (measuring with an instrument) of one of the two вҖңfreeвҖқ particles being formed, which initially were in a tangled state (as to polarization, spin projection) and constituted a unified system, means an irreversible, after WeizsГӨcker [79], concurrent alteration, in accordance with the principle of least action, of the entire system including, in addition to both particles and the instrument for fixing the former one, the вҖңentire vacuumвҖқ with its boundary conditions altering during the course of measurement, inclusive of the vacuum in the vicinity of the latter, as yet вҖңfreeвҖқ particle. In that case, the alteration of the vacuum in the neighborhood of both subsystems (the particle being measured cum instrument and the вҖңfreeвҖқ particle) proceeds, in accordance with the experiment, at a very high, effectively infinite, c, rate, so that an impression is created that the вҖңcorrelationsвҖқ being fixed exist at any instant of time and are not transferred by any signal (see Ref. No. [76], p. 123).
It is quite possible that the results of the studies conducted by N.A. Kozyrev [80] and repeated by M.M. Lavrentiev and co-workers from the Siberian Department of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR [81, 82] at the 50-inch reflector of the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR can be comprehended in the same way using the notions of the infinite transfer rate of the information pertaining to alterations of the physical vacuum in the vicinity of material objects. Registered in these works was a remote influence of a number of stellar objects located at distances from one astronomical unit (Sun, 8.3 light minutes) to hundreds and thousands of light years on the condition of a physical system (specifically the resistance of a resistor) placed into the focal plane of a telescope aimed at the stellar object of interest. Fixed in that case were the true positions of the stellar objects

on the celestial sphere at the given instant of time and also the positions at which these objects are being fixed visually, i.e., after the lapse of time necessary for light to cover the distance between each of the objects and the observer. The main result of these investigations is that a star in its apparent position exerts a few times weaker effect on the resistor than it has in its true position, and only at the exact instant of culmination at that [81], thus reflecting the вҖқinstantaneity of the transfer of actionsвҖқ (see Ref. No. [80], p. 388) for cosmological distances. Incidentally, such differences were registered not for all of the objects studied [80, 81]. Fairly great differences were observed, in particular, when training the telescope at the вҖңapparentвҖқ and the вҖңtrueвҖқ position of Procyon (Alpha Canis Minoris), a subgiant with a brightness exceeding that of the Sun by 7.5 times, one of the stars nearest to the Solar system (11.4 light years). The greatest differences in the resistance of the resistor were detected when fixing the вҖңapparentвҖқ and the вҖңtrueвҖқ position on the celestial sphere of Cygnus X-1, the well-known X-radiation source 6 000 light years distant from the Sun. The optical component of this double star system is a blue supergiant with a surface temperature of some 31 000 K and a mass exceeding that of the Sun by 33 пӮұ 9 times. The lower limit on the mass of the accreting object вҖ“ a black hole вҖ“ into which matter slowly flows from the atmosphere of the optical supergiant, thus forming a gas disk, is estimated at 16 Вұ 5 Mвҳә. X-radiation (pulses varying in power and duration, up to a millisecond) is generated in the internal layers of the gas disk of this double star system, whose temperature is estimated at tens and hundreds of millions of degrees Celsius [83].
It should be emphasized once more that attention here is paid to the purely experimental results of the pioneering research conducted by N.A. Kozyrev [80]. Incidentally, no facts contradicting the observations made by N.A. Kozyrev were noted in the later works performed by M.M. Lavrentiev and co-workers [81, 82] at a more perfect experimental level. To comprehend the inference about the practically instantaneous transfer of information from stellar systems to the detecting instrument, one can only assume that the intense processes occurring in the near-surface regions of the strongly nonstationary stellar systems of interest are due to the incessant substantial alteration of the QED-vacuum adjoining regions of nonstationarity of stellar matter. Information about local alterations taking place in the вҖңboundary conditionsвҖқ for the vacuum, limited by the вҖңlocalвҖқ velocity of light, is being practically instantaneously вҖңspreadвҖқ all over the QED-vacuum as a unified system with a mean energy density of пҒҘV. The resistor in the focus of the reflector telescope apparently proves sensitive to such relaxation changes in the vacuum as reach it. And the situation here is practically equivalent to that fixed in the experiments aimed at verifying Einstein-Podolsky-RosenвҖҷs idea with the analysis of the Bell-LГ©ger inequalities [74вҖ“78]. It can be assumed that the further experiments by Kozyrev-LavrentievвҖҷs method would make it possible to add fresh arguments to the comprehension of the physical essence of the QED-vacuum and go over to a вҖңfinerвҖқ level of phenomenology than that considered in this work, with model representations making concrete the various manifestations of such a vacuum being introduced.
Fresh opportunities for revealing the essential properties of the base medium of our
Universe, the physical vacuum, can be opened up by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). To illustrate, while analyzing proton-proton collisions of high вҖңmultiplicityвҖқ at the LHC, in which over a hundred hadrons were being born (the center-of-mass energy was 7 TeV), Basso and co-workers [84] detected pairs of charged particles featuring a high degree of correlation, as if they were associated from birth. It can be assumed that these pairs, while being created, formed вҖңhadronic moleculesвҖқ in a tangled state (for example, as to the spin projection for baryons), as this could have been realized with neutron pairs in the above-described experiment performed by Aleksandrov and co-workers [60]. And the particles of such a pair retained their correlation during their subsequent recession because of the вҖңentanglementвҖқ phenomenon, as this occurred in the experiments conducted by GrГ¶blacher and co-workers [77] and Aspect [78].

The author is grateful to Dr. J. Botha for valuable discussions that initiated this investigation, and also to L.D. Blokhintsev and V.I. Muromtsev for debates about nuclear physics problems.


REFERENCES
Dirac P.A.M. Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford University Press. 1982. 4th Edition. 314 p.
G.W. Erickson. Improved Lamb-shift calculation for all values of Z // Phys. Rev. Lett. 1971.
V. 27. P. 780-783.
Klimchitskaya G.L., Mohideen U., Mostepanenko V.M. The Casimir force between real materials: experiment and theory // Rev Mod. Phys. 2009. V. 81. P. 1827-1885.
Jaffe R.L. The Casimir effect and the quantum vacuum // Phys. Rev D. 2005. V. 72 P. 021301-1-5; http://arXiv:hep-th/0503158v1.
C. Beck, M.C. Mackey. Zeropoint fluctuations and dark energy in Josephson junctions // Fluctuation and Noise Letters. 2007. V. 7. No. 2. P. C27-C35.
Bettini A. Introduction to elementary particle Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2008, 431 p.
Rubakov V.A. Hierarchies of fundamental constants (to items Nos 16, 17, and 27 from GinzburgвҖҷs list) // Physics вҖ“ Uspekhi. Advances in Physical Sciences. 2007. V. 50. N 4. P. 390вҖ“396.
Sahni V. Dark matter and dark energy // Lect. Notes Phys. 2004. V. 653. P. 141-180; arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0403324v3.
Chernin A.D. Dark energy and universal antigravitation // Physics вҖ“ Uspekhi. Advances in Physical Sciences. 2008. V. 51. N 3. P. 253вҖ“282.
Padmanabhan T. Darker side of the Universe. 29 International Cosmic Ray Conference Pune. 2005. V. 10. P. 47-62.
T. Reichhardt. Cosmologists look forward to clear picture // Nature. 2003. V. 421. P. 777.
ZelвҖҷdovich Ya.B. Vacuum theory: a possible solution to the singularity problem of cosmology // Physics вҖ“ Uspekhi. Advances in Physical Sciences. 1981. V. 24. N 3. P. 216вҖ“230.
OkunвҖҷ L.B. The Einstein formula: E0 = mc2. Is not the Lord laughing? // Physics вҖ“ Uspekhi. Advances in Physical Sciences. 2008. V. 51. N 5. P. 513вҖ“527.
Feynman R.P., Leighton R.B., Sands M. The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Vol. 1: Mechanics. Heat. Radiation. Chap. 15, В§ 9. Addison Wesley Reading Mass. 1966.
Timashev S.F. The Plank energy-mass source as an alternative to the Big Bang. http://arXiv.org/abs/0803.0231v2.
Burlankov D.E. Time, space, gravity. Moscow-Izhevsk: NIC вҖңRegular and Chaotic DynamicsвҖқ. 2006. 420 p. (in Russian)
Weinberg S. Cosmology. Oxford: University Press. 2008, 593 p.
Borzakov S.B., Panteleev Ts., Strelkov A.V. Search for dineutron in interaction of neutrons with deuterons // Lettersto EPAN. 2002. N 2 [111]. P. 45-50 (in Russian).
Thomson J.J. On the electric and magnetic effects produced by the motion of electrified bodies // Philosophical Magazine. 1881. V. 11 (68). N 5. P. 229-249.
Thomson J.J. Electricity and matter. Рңoscow: URSS. 2004. 264 p. (in Russian).
Thomson J.J. On relation between matter and ether in accordance with the novel researches in the electricity. The speech given on the 4th of November 1907 at Manchester University. In: Ether and matter. Moscow: URSS. 2004. P. 71-92. (in Russian).
Timashev S.F. On the microscopic origin of the Second Law // Quantum Limits to the Second Law. First International Conference on Quantum Limits to the Second Law. AIP Conference Proceedings: V. 643 / Editor Daniel P. Sheehan. вҖ“ Melville, New York: American Institute of Physics, 2002. вҖ“ P. 367-372.

Timashev S.F. Flicker-Noise Spectroscopy: information in chaotic signals. Moscow: Fizmatlit. 2007. 248 p.
Migdal A.B. Quadrupole and dipole Оі-radiation of nuclei // JETP. 1945. V. 15. P. 81-88 (in Russian).
Ferentz M., Gell-Mann M., Pines D. The giant nuclear dipole resonance // Phys. Rev. 1953.
V. 92. P. 836-837.
Ishkhanov B.S., Yudin N.P., Eramzhyan R.A. Giant Resonances in Atomic Nuclei // Physics of Elementary Particles and Atomic Nuclei. 2000. V. 31. N. 2. P. 313-349.
Ohanian H.C. What is spin? // American Journal of Physics. 1986. V. 54. N 6. P. 500-505.
Landau L D, Lifshitz E M Quantum Mechanics: Non-Relativistic Theory. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1977.
Feynman R.P., Leighton R.B., Sands M. The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Vol. 2: Electromagnetism and Matter. Chap. 28, В§ 4. Addison Wesley. Reading Mass. 1966.
Dubovikov M.S., Simonov Yu.A. Decay of resonant states and determination of their quantum numbers // Physics вҖ“ Uspekhi. Advances in Physical Sciences. 1971. V. 13. N 4. P. 522-543.
Lanczos C. The Variational Principles of Mechanics. Toronto: Univ. Toronto Press, 1964.
Capozziello S., Cardone V.F., Trosi A. Reconciling dark energy models with f(R) theories // Phys. Rev. D. 2005. V. 71. P. 043503.
Carroll S.M., Duvvuri V., Trodden M., Turner M.S. Is cosmic