continuing to see isotropy from all new positions reached, a thought experiment with an illustration is presented here. Imagine that a girl is grasping several round ‘hula” type hoops. Her hands are in the center of the three-dimensional sphere defined by the hoops.

/


Figure 2: The grasping of hoops is always in the center.


In Figure 2, the global “shell” of the “visible universe” is suggested by the diameters of the hoops shown. Each hoop is painted with markings representing stars (or galaxies) along different portions of it. The place where the girl’s hands hold them represents her perspective of being at the center of the volume defined by all the hoops. If she begins to move the grasping spot by hand over hand motion, her hands will remain at the center of this space. The locations on the surface of the hoops, representing the outer sphere of contents of the universe, will be pulled in to new apparent locations as viewed from the center, where they will appear adjacent to one another. They will also appear to be in front of the direction of her hand-over-hand motion and approaching her hands.
Meanwhile, the painted stars along each hoop will rise in a curved motion, then lower and pass from in front to behind the location of her hands. Then they would start to rise again.

The movement of portions of the hoops from above the girl’s hands to below them is consistent with a possible mechanism of motion suggested by this model. In that mechanism, which is analogous to swimming or travel through water, forward motion involves displacement of space and matter in a direction opposite to that of motion (see 9.3).

This thought experiment is meant to suggest that if we could travel forward a significant fraction of the radius of the universe, in a very rough analogy to the circumference surfaces of the hoops moving, the outer surface of what appears to us from our current perspective to be the spherical “shell” of the “observable universe” could join together to become a pathway ahead of us, for light and theoretically for extremely long distance travel. The apparent positions of closer galaxies (not represented by these hoops) would also change with motion, so that their locations relative to each other could be preserved. The view from every location in the universe would give the appearance of being in the center (isotropy). Viewing from changing positions would also introduce parallax effects (Lucas 2022).

The thought experiment of the hoops is not suggested as a realistic description of isotropy. It has many flaws, including that the distribution of galaxies would become more concentrated in the direction of motion (as represented by the girl’s grip of the hoops), which seems improbable. Also, smaller “hoops” to represent the apparent paths of nearer galaxies are not included. However, its suggestion that light could come to us from around the universe as a body moved through space, and that this could produce isotropic views, is offered for consideration. This would require curved paths for light where there is no space ahead for a straight path, but it would not require warping of space itself around mass as in general relativity.

There might be a way to examine how the apparent positions of stars in our Milky Way galaxy actually do change with very long-distance travel. Voyager 1 is a satellite that was launched in 1977 and is now over 14.6 billion miles away from earth, beyond our solar system and the most distant object ever sent into space. It is expected to be able to send data and images from its two cameras until at least 2025 (Howell 2022). Although those 14.6 billion miles represent a very small distance galactically, a re-examination of some of those images might have the potential to help produce a more realistic answer to the questions related to isotropy.

THE ORIGIN AND FUTURE OF THE UNIVERSE, AND OF ENERGY (LIGHT AND “DARK”)

In Section 3, we discussed how the addition of units of space among existing units is the best explanation for the expansion of the universe. Now, we shall move on to consider the implications of overall space expansion, including its acceleration, on the universe as a whole, past present, and future. The nature and possible source of energy will be explored. Three possible contributors to the acceleration of space expansion (“dark energy”), and three possible decelerating factors, will be considered.

.The Acceleration (“Dark Energy”), and Possible Future of the Hubble Expansion


Since the 1990s, the rates of red-shifting, and thus of the expansion, have been found to have increased over time (Rubin & Heitloff 2020). This has been puzzling to many physicists, because it does not seem consistent with the “Big Bang” model in which all energy was imparted to the universe at the very beginning (N. Jackson 2015). The term “dark energy” usually refers to this acceleration of the expansion (Gohd, C. 2024).

The current value of the Hubble constant, measured by various methods, is estimated to be in the range of 72-74 km/second/megaparsec (N. Jackson 2015), or about 22.1-22.7 km/second/million light years (one megaparsec being about 3.26 million light years). However, estimates from the early universe, based in part on the CMB, yield a lower rate of 67 km/second/megaparsec, suggesting about a 9% rise over the course of about 6 billion years (Riess & NASA Hubble Team 2019). This indicates an acceleration of the expansion rate, but not an exponential one. David Tong has expressed wonder why the acceleration of the expansion is not much greater than it is (Strogatz & Tong 2022).

The Hubble constant H0 may not in fact be a constant. This has increasingly been considered, and it is often described as being constant over space but not over time (Siegel 2019, August). That would presumably mean that at any given era, the expansion rate would be homogeneous, but that various factors could alter it over time. However, the redshifts from the more distant galaxies are in light that was emitted billions of years ago, so a sampling from multiple eras is available for Hubble observations. If, as proposed here, there is less space expansion locally in areas with higher density of matter and hence more space deletion, H0 should not be truly constant over space, though an average H0 over vast areas of space might approximate homogeneity.

Six possible factors that could affect the rate of expansion will be reviewed below. Three of the factors should lead to acceleration, and the other three might lead to deceleration. At least one of the three acceleration factors is proposed to be in effect. Any one of the three might produce more rapid acceleration than has been observed, and one could produce exponential acceleration for which there is no evidence. Therefore, at least one possible deceleration factors should also be in effect as a counter-balance, to help reach the current limited rate of acceleration. This agrees with thinking by some cosmologists that multiple factors may be involved (Cho 2023).

Since in the Hubble equation (1), the velocity of recession v depends only on distance s and the Hubble constant H0, each factor affecting that velocity must be able to change either s or H0 or both. Factor “a” below would change s. The other factors would presumably alter H0 or add additional terms to the equation. Factors “b,” “d,” and “f” are relatively unique to the “Waves of Space” model, and factor “a” may be underemphasized in current theories. Some factors listed are probably not involved, while other factors not listed could be.

The first possible acceleration factor is exponential increase in distance. The first and most
prominent possible explanation is that the recession velocity v, which is the momentary added distance per time, keeps increasing the distance s between stars or other objects over time.
That distance in turn increases velocity (which means that there is acceleration), because in the Hubble equation (1), if H0 is constant, distance s is directly proportional to velocity. So with each time interval, each side of the equation increases the other. This assumes that the newly added space has the same ability to increase the velocity of recession as pre-existing space. The Hubble equation itself implies not only an accelerating velocity of expansion, but an exponential increase. The differential form of the Hubble relationship, considering the momentary velocity as ds/dt, is ds/dt = H0*s. This can be rearranged algebraically to equation (2), showing that the ratio of the momentary increase in distance to existing distance increases over time.
ds/s=H0*dt	(2)

This in turn is related to equation (3), in which the increase in distance with time is exponential and resembles continuous interest compounding. S0 represents the distance to any galaxy at a baseline time. (This baseline time is not meant to represent a “Big Bang” or the

beginning of the universe, just the beginning of a measuring period.) St represents the distance to the same galaxy after a period of time, and e is Euler’s number, the base of natural
logarithms.
St=S (eHo*t)	(3)

The second acceleration factor is a hypothetical mid-point at which expansion rate will be

maximal. This hypothesis is that the expansion of space could be a harmonic oscillation with

an equilibrium position midway to maximal expansion. The velocity of expansion of space would be maximal at the midpoint, analogous to that of a pendulum, and then would steadily decelerate.
By this hypothesis, in dramatic contrast to the “Big Bang” theory, the visible universe could have started to expand very slowly. The expansion phase could have than sped up, but could not do so indefinitely, because it would be drawing its space from a contraction phase in the other dimensions that would eventually be running out of space to transfer to us. This would suggest that expansion, represented by the velocity of recession, should eventually reach a maximum value, then should gradually slow, reaching a stop after several billion more years. At that point, the expansion phase would be complete, and a contraction phase would begin, starting very slowly and increasing gradually in rate till the same midpoint, after which the rate of contraction would gradually decrease. This description of variations in the rate of expansion is similar to a logistic regression curve.
The maximal velocity of recession would be at an unknown mid-location, halfway to maximal potential expansion. The fact that the velocity of recession is still increasing might suggest that our expansion is approaching but has not yet reached that mid-location. The hypothetical mid-location would not necessarily represent an original position of rest, but would be an

inflection for both our visible dimensions and the alternate ones, at which maximal rates of expansion in one manifold and of contraction in the other would be reached.
The third acceleration factor is gravity reduction due to distance. This possible explanation is

that acceleration of expansion is occurring due to the reduction in gravitational force opposing the expansion. The concept of gravity in the “Waves of Space” model will be explained (see 5.1), but in any theory of gravity, including Newtonian and general relativity, the velocity of recession caused by space expansion would be partially counter-balanced by gravity.
However, as galaxies become more distant from each other, their gravitational effects should steadily decrease. Gravitational acceleration toward matter with the wave quality of mass is inversely proportional to the square of distance from the center of gravity, as per equation (3) (see 5.2). Therefore, increasing distance should reduce the counter-balance to expansion. This is in contrast to the stretching of a spring or other elastic material, in which resistance to further stretching and restorative force (potential energy) increase with each increment of distance (Hooke’s law, see 3.2). The reduced gravitational force, however, might be balanced by the model’s gravitational potential energy concept, referred to in factor “d” next below, and to be discussed (see 5.1).
The first possible deceleration factor is gravitational force due to spatial pressure, which has

not yet been discussed (see 5.1). As per factor “c,” gravitation is the main known force to

oppose expansion, but it becomes weaker with distance. However, if the spatial pressure, which will be suggested to include the potential energy of gravity, were also increased by new space from the expansion (which will be debated), this might act as a negative feedback or pushback to limit the very expansion that contributed to it. It could help to counteract the reduced strength of gravity of factor “c”. However, net spacial pressure should remain stable

in order for the gravitational constant G to remain a constant, so any increase should be counter-balanced, or neutralized by its effects.
The second possible deceleration factor is “dark matter.” This is poorly understood (see 5.4),

but is thought to pull the universe together gravitationally (Cho 2023) and to oppose expansion. Since “dark matter” is estimated to greatly exceed known types of matter (Betz 2020; Ghosh 2017), there would be plenty of gravitational force to decrease the Hubble constant H0.
The third possible deceleration factor is possible conversion of some of the energy of the

acceleration, and of expansion in general, to new mass, adding to gravitation (see 4.4 and

10.3). This might combine with factor “e” to counter-balance the reduction of gravitation due

to increasing distances (factor “c”).


Another approach that cosmologists and astrophysicists have used to explain the expansion of the universe and its acceleration is to insert a “cosmological constant” into general relativity. Einstein first introduced one in 1915 in order to allow the universe to be static, neither contracting nor expanding. He later withdrew it and considered it to have been his biggest mistake (Mann 2021).
However, a revised version with a mysterious anti-gravity effect has more recently been reintroduced by other researchers to fit the accelerating expansion. In the model called lambda-CDM, which fits the CMB data, lambda is a “cosmological constant” and CDM stands for cold “dark matter” (Cho 2023). This has become a paradigm and a stimulus to research in cosmology and astrophysics (Horvath 2023). However, there is pushback by other physicists, who think that any “cosmological constant” is a “fudge factor” with no real theory or suggested mechanism behind it (Mann 2021).
Recent data from the James Webb space telescope is also inconsistent with lambda-CDM (Malewar

2024). Whatever actually happens to the rate of expansion may determine the ultimate fate of the universe.

“Big Bang” vs. Alternating Expansion and Contraction

The “Big Bang” theory has thrived since discovery of the Hubble expansion (Cho 2023). It has been predominant for several decades as a description of the origin of the universe, to the degree of becoming orthodoxy. This is in spite of the fact that at least two aspects do not conform to any known physical process. First, according to the mathematics of the theory, all of the energy and matter of the universe would have started at some infinitesimal point often referred to as a “singularity.” The possibility of such an entity as a “singularity” existing has already been rejected above (see 2.6).
Even if there were such a thing, it would lack any content, and thus would have no potential to develop into the entire universe.

The second unrealistic aspect to the “Big Bang” theory, also based on mathematics rather than a physical model, is that the unimaginably small microcosm would have expanded exponentially in an extremely rapid “inflation” for a fraction of a second before slowing to the known Hubble rate of expansion and its modest acceleration (see 4.1). The rate of this momentary expansion would have far exceeded the speed of light (Chown 2024). No known force in physics could have caused such an ultra-brief and powerful “inflation” moment (Wolchover 2018).

The “inflation” aspect of the “Big Bang” theory was developed by Paul Steinhardt and others in the early 1980s, but more recently Steinhardt turned against “inflation” and the entire “Big Bang” theory, and has become an advocate of the “Big Bounce” theory described below, after deciding that inflation could cause a multiverse with an infinite number of solutions. Sabine Hossenfelder (2017)

concluded that “inflation” has failed to solve any of the problems for which it was intended, and that it is “not any simpler and it doesn’t explain anything.”

There are two common arguments supporting the “Big Bang,” but they are not without challenges:

Homogeneity: One argument for the “Big Bang” and “inflation” is that the universe is

relatively homogeneous and isotropic (see 3.3). This is credited to the primordial material that became the antecedents of the stars having supposedly been uniformly distributed and contiguous prior to “inflation.” The “Waves of Space” model would permit an alternative explanation for the relative homogeneity of the universe. The new space continually appearing everywhere would consist of a uniform distribution of “volon” units of space, and the waves of matter that developed in that space should also be relatively uniform.
Other physical processes involve homogeneity and isotropy, so they has limitations as an argument for a “Big Bang.”
CMB radiation: A second case made for the “Big Bang” model is the cosmic microwave
background radiation (CMB), which is relatively uniform everywhere. It is supposedly a residual of radiation from primordial extremely hot temperatures of the “Big Bang” The CMB is assumed to have evolved from electromagnetic waves that were extremely high-frequency (short wave lengths) at that time. The subsequent expansion could have steadily increased these wave lengths until they reached the microwave spectrum. A limitation of this conception is that to some extent it “begs the question” in the true sense of that expression, i.e., it assumes what is to be proven. It depends on those assumptions, so it cannot prove them. If you hypothesize that there was a “Big Bang,” with no new energy

added since then, and that there were free electromagnetic waves floating around with very short wave lengths at that time that have since steadily experienced elongation of their wave lengths, the CMB radiation is consistent and supportive. However, without such a starting hypothesis, reasoning backward from the CMB can lead to other interpretations than a hot “Big Bang” containing all of the universe’s energy. The expansion of space may be a continuing source of energy (see 4.3 and 10.3), and if so, radiation currently found in the microwave range could have been emitted throughout that expansion, at a range of steadily decreasing frequencies over time. Several other alternative causative mechanisms for the CMB, including one by Hoyle, have been proposed that have never been fully developed (Ćirković & Perović 2018).

An alternate theory called the “Big Bounce,” now supported by Steinhardt and others, predicts that there could be an endless cycle of expansions and contractions of the universe (Wolchover 2018). Each restart of expansion would presumably start the creation of matter and energy all over again, different than before. It would probably also reset the clock, starting measurable time again from zero. Friedmann-Lemaitre spacetime models for the universe are said to allow for alternating expansion and contraction of the universe (Marsh 2014).

The concept of a gradual harmonic oscillation of expansions and contractions is appealing with respect to a “Waves of Space” model. The model could provide an explanation for this alternation different from the “Big Bounce” theory, as space moved back and forth between our observable dimensions and the alternate dimensions. “Inflation” would not be a part of this concept.

The current expansion phase in our dimensions would presumably end and start to reverse when there was no more space remaining in the alternate dimensions capable of transfer to ours. That would also be the end of the contraction phase in the alternate dimensions. A contraction phase would then begin in the maximally expanded dimensions. Maximum and minimum sizes of each set of dimensions might be approached gradually, without actual “bangs” or “crunches.” In our current expansion phase, electromagnetic wave lengths in light from distant stars are becoming longer. In a contraction phase, the wave lengths would become shorter.

In the final stages of a contraction phase, so much space would have been deleted that the waves constituting matter might have broken down and disintegrated. However, the property of mass, deleting the final space and transmitting it to the other dimensions, might have survived through the end of contraction, a dissociation between matter and its mass also proposed to occur in black holes (see 9.5) and possibly in dark matter (see 5.4).

Energy: What It Is, and Its Association with Waves, Space Deletion, and Mass

Energy has been referred to throughout this paper but not yet clearly described and related to the “Waves of Space” model. In scientific discussion and lessons about energy, there are varied semantics, especially regarding potential energy, and a number of classifications with different numbers of categories ranging from four to twenty, several of which are sub-types of kinetic energy. Generally included as categories and discussed briefly below are mechanical, thermal, electrical, radiant, chemical, and nuclear. Because energy and work can both be classically defined as force*distance, each of these forms of energy, either directly or indirectly, should be able to cause motion of matter (Norton 2022, February; Gregersen 2017). Each type of energy should be capable of

inter-conversion to others, because of conservation of energy (or of mass-energy), and in some conceptions, every type has a potential form that depends on position or structure. That is compatible with the “Waves of Space” model, which proposes that matter and energy are inter-convertible waves and other processes in space,

Kinetic energy is responsible for the motion of matter (see 9.3). In some classifications, the energies of gravitation, sound, and elasticity are listed as different categories, but they all involve motion of matter and therefore are variations of kinetic energy. What is most different among them is their types of motion, and so they will be considered in the classification of motion, see 9.3. Each version of kinetic energy has an interchangeable form of potential energy. This model provides a new conception of gravitational potential energy (see 5.1). Potential energy does not appear to be transmitted like waves, and some types might be stored in vibrations or pressure instead.

Matter that is considered to be moving, which the model considers to be “real” (see 9.4) has mass and velocity and therefore kinetic energy (1/2 mv2). If matter is being accelerated, there is a force acting on it over a distance, and its kinetic energy is increasing. If it is moving at a steady velocity (as with inertia in space), its kinetic energy is not increasing. If it is slowing, its kinetic energy may be transforming into potential energy, and/or to friction (usually a conversion to thermal energy).

Kinetic energy is suggested in this model to operate in a wave-like manner. This wave nature is complex, because matter itself is proposed to be made up of standing waves, its gravitation is proposed to generate “gravitational field waves” (see 5.3), and it interacts with electromagnetic waves. A proposal about how this might work will be discussed later (see 9.3)

Thermal energy is essentially the physical motion of molecules (small combinations of matter waves), and therefore is related to kinetic energy, already discussed. The history of concepts of heat is mentioned above in connection with perceptions of reality (see 1.3), and below under the history of thermodynamics (see 10.2). Transfers of molecular motion between substances of different temperatures (different average levels of molecular motion) can drive steam engines and create kinetic energy.

Electrical and magnetic energy (other than in electromagnetic waves, which are classified as radiant) can also be considered to be a form of kinetic energy, in that electrons, which are small matter waves, flow through a conductor as their energy flows around it. Some speculations about its possible wave characteristics and mention of the unique interactive motion of electrical and magnetic charges are included below (see 7.1 and 9.3). Electrostatic energy is the potential energy of electrical charges, thought to be static and stored in the electrical field.

Radiant or electromagnetic energy consists of electromagnetic waves, which have determinants of frequency, amplitude, and concentration, as discussed in detail below with respect to the model (see 7.1). Some frequencies can alter the motion of electrons, while others can produce molecular vibrations and vice versa, producing a close relationship with thermal energy.

Chemical energy involves the conversion of standing waves of matter from one form to another often going through intermediate steps (see 7.3). Its potential energy is considered to exist in its molecular bonds. In a chemical reaction, the end products are at a lower energy level. The wave components that are no longer needed typically convert to thermal energy. There is a minute “mass deficit” meaning that the total mass of the end products is slightly less than of the starting products,

and energy is emitted. This can be interpreted as a conversion of mass into energy, although at a much smaller level than in nuclear reactions, and without a decrease in the number of atoms. In the current model, chemical reactions are essentially wave interactions.

Nuclear energy converts matter waves to other wave forms. The number of baryons (see 7.3) is preserved, but some of their mass may be converted to radiant, thermal, and kinetic energy.
Because some of the matter waves no longer exist in their original forms, nuclear reactions (fission or fusion) are commonly described as an example of matter converting into energy. In special relativity, matter and energy are inter-convertible, as per Einstein’s famous equation E=mc2 (Lamb & Simon 2023), The interpretation of matter conversion to energy in the present model could be that waves with rest or invariant mass (classified as matter) may be converted to other waves lacking that specific property and therefore no longer defined as matter waves. Other than in fission and fusion reactions involving a handful of elements, large-scale conversion of matter to energy has not been achieved.

The Sources of Matter and Energy


It is intriguing to speculate that all or almost all energy and matter in our dimensions ultimately might have come from space expansion and deletion over the total history of our universe, rather than from a “Big Bang.” This possibility is worthy of consideration if “dark energy” is included as an acceleration of the expansion, and if “dark matter” is included as an additional source of space deletion. “Dark energy” is thought to account for about 68% (Horvath 2023) and “dark matter” for about 27% (Sutter 2022, December) of the mass-energy in the universe, or about 95% between the two of them.

Arriving space makes objects with existing matter and energy more distant from each other.
Regardless of whether this is a passive process, it produces apparent motion that is considered here to be as “real” as that of gravitation (see 10.3). Space addition might cause groups of volons to spin and become vortices, producing the countervailing space deletion of gravitation. Gravitation could in turn coalesce matter waves into stars and planets, as is believed to be the origin of those celestial bodies and is still occurring (Lamb & Henderson 2023). The vortex concept has resemblances to Descartes’ theory (see 2.1), except that it utilizes only space rather than a separate aether substance permeating that space.

All “volons” are presumably engaged to some extent in wave motion within fields or in other energy or matter. All also have the potential to transfer between sets of dimensions, which can be considered as potential energy. The total energy in the universe might be a function of the number of “volons” (and hence the volumes) in both sets of dimensions. If so, E= f(V) where E is energy and V is volume.

The “Big Bang” theory likewise suggests that it resulted in the formation of the stars and galaxies, and is the ultimate source of energy in the universe. One key difference from that theory is that in the “Waves of Space” model, creation would be an ongoing process rather than constituting the delayed and pre-determined results of a single primordial explosive event as with the “Big Bang.” Another difference is that the expansion process would add energy along the way (see 10.3).

Day to day, the energy that the earth utilizes predominantly derives directly or indirectly (e.g., by photosynthesis) from thermonuclear fusion on the sun (Lea 2022), despite dilution by the square of the distance from the sun. In the “Waves of Space” model, this energy is transmitted to the earth by

waves that ultimately interact with atoms. A very small contribution to the earth’s energy comes from nuclear fission on earth.

THE GRAVITY OF THE SITUATION


In Section 4, we considered an alternative to the “Big Bang” theory, briefly considered the speculative possibility that space addition might be the ultimate source of the matter and energy in the universe. We also reviewed reasons why an expansion of the universe should accelerate, and possible mechanisms for this “dark energy.” Now, we shall move on to an original conception of gravity, in which units of space are deleted by the property of mass rather than being added. Note that throughout this article, the terms gravity and gravitation are used synonymously,

Space Deletion as the Cause of Gravity


If new space can appear and account for the Hubble expansion of the universe, it has already been suggested that there are processes in nature that can involve space deletion. If the universe experiences alternated expansion and contraction phases, a contraction phase would be a large-scale example of space deletion from our dimensions. This is not something that we are experiencing currently, however.

All matter possesses the property of mass. Gravity is caused by and is proportional to mass, and the cause is proposed to be space deletion. Since mass is hypothesized to consist of waves, it seems reasonable to conclude that mass is a wave property residing in matter, that produces and regulates space deletion. That was the definition of mass provided in the introduction (see 1.6). As

will be shown, effects that mass has in classical physics and in relativity theories can be explained by space deletion.

Gravitation results in objects becoming closer together, or else inhibits them from becoming further apart (providing the centripetal force causing curvatures of pathways or orbital motion).
The removal of space between material objects by deletion is proposed to be the cause of these effects. Throughout a gravitational field, there would be an in-flow of external “volons” to replace the deleted ones and each other (see 5.3 and 6.4). The deleted space is conjectured to be transferred to the alternate dimensions (see 2.4). An explanation for objects coming closer together will be discussed first.

The gravitation hypothesis of this model is that the actual removal and transfer of “volons” occurs at a rate proportional to the amount of mass. The “volons” that will be deleted are those in immediate contact with matter (which is itself composed of “volons” that are organized into matter waves). Gravitational space deletion in this model is continuous, approaching mass from all directions.

To better understand the mechanisms involved in space deletion, an analogy from hydrodynamics will be utilized. Think of a tank full of water, also containing objects that are dissolved and others that are mixed with the water or floating on it. There is a drain that is open, and a filter in place to assure that only water escapes when the drain is open. The drain is connected to pipes totally separate from the tank, that lead to a sewer. Since water only experiences a minimal space between molecules, every removed molecule would be closely juxtaposed to the surrounding molecules. Any drop of water that went down the drain would be in juxtaposition with its neighboring

drops, and would automatically bring surrounding water closer to the drain, but not instantaneously (by which is meant in this article immediately and automatically taking up no time at all), restrained by the limited size of the drain and by viscosity. Small objects in the tub would be carried with the water, and they would collect in the filter. The size of the drain would determine the maximum transfer of water per time, and the water pressure would determine the rate at which water went through the drain.

In this analogy, the water represents space, the drain is the mass property and its size determines the amount of mass, i.e., the rate of space deletion per time, The pipes it connects to represent a transfer system of the space to the alternative dimensions. The filter is the surface of the earth or other matter that absorbs the force of the fallen objects. The objects in the tank represent mass and light being pushed toward the drain and the filter. For all drops of water that go through the drain, others are in close juxtaposition and will take their place.

Like all analogies, this one is imperfect. The decrease in pressure differences with the inverse square of distance cannot be demonstrated because the tub or tank does not extend out in all directions. A better analogy for that aspect might be a vacuum cleaner with a tube held up in the air rather than being pressed against a floor. Ambient air pressure difference would force air into the tube, and the force would decrease with the square of distance (adjusted for air pressure differences with height). Another analogy to demonstrate the decrease of pressure with the square of distance could be a tube applying suction deep in a lake or ocean.

The force of a surviving falling object against the attracting mass, such as the earth, adds its own mass and kinetic energy to the attracting mass, analogous to small matter in the water collecting

on the filter. As space is transferred between sets of dimensions, energy and matter waves in an intact form would not be expected to transfer along with it, but they could be reconstructed in the new dimensions (see 4.4 and 10.3). A possible exception might occur in quantum mechanics (see 8.1).

The water is pushed toward the drain by water pressure differences. Water pressure in a tank of water depends on atmospheric pressure plus the height of the water column. Air moves into a vacuum cleaner due to air pressure differences. If space works at all analogously to water and air, there should be an ambient spatial pressure.

Spatial pressure would determine the amount of space moving into the “drain” of mass. Hardly any space would actually be deleted without this pressure, just as hardly any water would drain from a tank unless there were a column of water in the tank creating pressure. A spatial pressure gradient (lower toward the center of gravity than from the external direction) could push space “volons” toward the mass, where they would be deleted. The pressure would push surrounding space to replace the deleted “volons,” and then replacing each other, maintaining a cascade of space replacing space, but not as a single body. The in-flow of space toward mass would also carry objects, such as smaller masses or light, that were located in the space being moved. The latter objects would ride along with the space they occupied, as it would move in toward the mass. The propagation of the process of “volon” replacement, in the form of a gravitational wavefront, would extend throughout the universe at the speed of light, but with diminishing force due to the inverse square law.
Spatial pressure has been a silent factor in gravitational equations, which attribute gravitational acceleration only to mass, G (the gravitational constant), and a square of distance from the center of gravity (radius). It has not been necessary mathematically for spatial pressure to be

recognized and included as a separate factor in gravitational equations, because its effects are incorporated into the properties of mass. However, in this model, spatial pressure is an essential concept for understanding the actual mechanism of gravitation. Walter Ruh (2022) appeared to recognize this in explaining gravitation by an acceleration throughout space related to spatial pressure, a critical vector being the ratio pressure/acceleration, and that the “sought-after parameter would have to be the still unknown space pressure.”

Spatial pressure in a gravitational field should have some similarities to water pressure in a tank with an open drain, but also some differences. Water pressure increases with the weight of the water column; space has no weight and its pressure increases with the reduced inverse square of distance from a mass. Water pressure is the same in any lateral direction at any depth, but is less toward a drain; spatial pressure similarly is the same from any direction within a “shell” of space around a mass, but is lower on the side toward the mass. Water pressure pushes material objects along with it toward the drain; spatial pressure pushes matter and light within it toward the mass. Water pressure does not penetrate material objects and water does not flow out of them; some space moving toward the mass does flow into and out of matter, at different rates (see 6.4).

Advantages of this spatial pressure concept include an explanation for why gravitation produces acceleration, since the continual application of force in the form of pressure has that effect. Force accelerates mass, but without spatial pressure it would not be clear why space deletion on its own would create a force. Also, the spatial pressure mechanism could be a component of balanced forces producing forward inertia, which will be considered (see 6.3). But one of the biggest advantages is the role that that spatial pressure could play as the potential energy of gravitation.

In this hypothesis, gravitation resulting from space deletion does not apply only to individual objects that have been elevated and therefore have supposed individual gravitational potential energy. “Volon” in-flow and deletion by mass occur continually, regardless of whether there is any matter in that space, let alone what the history of that matter has been. The classical concepts of gravitational potential and gravitational potential energy relating to individual objects, which have been lifted upward from mass, permit Lagrangian equations to be applied for calculating trajectories of objects influenced by gravitation. However, such calculations might alternatively be possible with a substitution of spatial pressure for gravitational potential energy.

There are a number of troublesome issues with the conventional concept that gravitation potential energy relates just to specific objects. It is invisible and undetectable when observing an object that supposedly has it, or an area of space in which it supposedly exists. The location, mechanism of storage, and mechanism of conversion back into kinetic energy have been undefined. Gravitational potential energy of individual objects, as traditionally conceived, may be separated from its supposedly related kinetic energy by vast gaps in time and space, or may never be connected.

Once a rocket shot from earth exceeds the escape velocity, its gravitational potential energy to return to earth becomes ineffective, and it may never return. If it approaches another planet, in acquires the potential energy of that planet’s gravitational field without ever having previously encountered and been lifted off that planet. Galaxies that interact gravitationally were never lifted from one another to create potential energy, except going back billions of years to the beginning of the expansion of the universe.

The alternative concept presented here, which resolves those problems without violating conservation of energy, is that all gravitational potential energy joins a large pool of spatial pressure rather than being held somehow in reserve for individual objects. As kinetic energy opposing gravitation slows and finally stops, the energy is added to that ambient spatial pressure, and when objects fall, they are propelled by spatial pressure toward the mass where space is being deleted. Since spatial pressure exists throughout the universe, it is not measurably reduced when an individual object’s gravitational kinetic energy increases. Pressure is defined as force per area, but in air or water, it acts on volume and converts to kinetic energy, and that is proposed for space as well.
The constancy of spatial pressure and possible additional sources deserve consideration.
Constancy would help prevent this pressure from slowing the accelerating rate of expansion (see 4.1). On the other hand, the kinetic effects of additional “volons” being added between existing ones might be expected to have a pressure effect on existing space, suggesting that spatial expansion could be an additional source of ambient spatial pressure (see 10.3). The accelerating rate of expansion might potentially tend to increase spatial pressure (see 4.4), if it were not counter-balanced. If the universe were to encounter some partial barrier to expansion, as from the elastic surface of a balloon, an increase in volume would increase pressure, but the universe is presumably unbounded. As the universe expands, the pressure just within the pre-existing gases like hydrogen and helium that fill the universe, should be diluted and thereby should decrease as per Boyle’s Law (pressure*volume=constant). That could be a counter-balance to any spatial pressure increase so that the pressure could remain stable.

The discussion so far has involved the removal of space by deletion and in-flow in-between material objects. However, a small but significant amount of space is also hypothesized to be

removed by gravitation from matter, also replaced (but incompletely) by spatial pressure, which can cause a limited penetration of “volons” into matter. This will be discussed in connection with general relativity, to help explain the shrinkage of matter under the influence of gravitation (see 6.4).

Newton assumed that gravitational information about a moving mass was transmitted through space instantaneously, but for the past century, physicists have instead presumed that the adjustment of gravitational fields occurs at the speed of light, and that is accepted in the “Waves of Space” model. The replacement of deleted space, which is the key to gravitational effects including field adjustments, cannot be instantaneous. Since at the speed of light, c=s/t (distance divided by time), t=s/c, indicating that the time needed for gravitational field adjustments should be proportional to the ratio of distance s to the speed of light c. An explanation of this and how waves and gravitational field adjustments could progress in an oscillatory, wave-like manner through space, will be provided later (see 5.3).

The total system of coordinated mechanisms described above could provide an explanation for the effects of gravity. In contrast, Newton’s gravitational equations merely provide the mathematical relationships. The space deletion explanation of gravity would be mathematically simpler than general relativity and its tensors. It could also satisfy the criteria for elegance, defined as “the adequate representation of a physical problem in mathematical formulae which bestow unity, symmetry, and harmony among the elements of the problem” (Tsilikis 1959).

The mechanism of space deletion is not precisely explained in this model, but the matter waves that carry the space-deleting property of mass might act as vortices that flush units of space to

the invisible dimensions. The spatial distribution of the wave forms of matter will be discussed later (see 8.3).

According to this model, the reason why matter and light passing by (moving horizontally past, not toward) the earth follow curved paths in a gravitational field is not that mass causes local curvature of space (or spacetime) as per general relativity. Instead, the inertia of the passing matter (producing a fictitious centrifugal force) interacts with the earth’s gravitation (creating a centripetal force). This is just as in classical Newtonian theory, except that in this model, the gravitation is due to space deletion and in-flow. The inertia of matter, and the pathway of light (which has no rest or invariant mass but of course does have energy) both attempt to progress in a straight line, while the inward motion of space is proposed to carry the matter and light travelling in that space in the direction of the earth’s center of gravity.. The otherwise straight path of matter and light moving through a gravitational field past the earth or another body with mass becomes a curved path.

If the inertial motion of the passing matter is strong enough to avoid falling into the earth or entering an orbit around it, the matter may continue past the earth but have its pathway deflected toward it. If the passing matter’s velocity were less, it could go into orbit, and if still less it could fall into the earth. Light pathways will be similarly deflected, but light travels so fast that the deflections by earth’s gravity are extremely small, and light traveling horizontally to the earth does not go into orbit or become bent so much that it strikes the earth (however, a black hole deletes enough space to cause both).

Gravitation is often described as an attraction toward mass, however spatial pressure differences would actually push units of space in toward where other units of space were deleted. So

gravitation would probably really involve a “push,” rather than a “pull” or attraction. Galileo Galilei showed that all objects subject to the gravitation of the earth accelerate the same if differences in air resistance can be disregarded or are negligible (Mittal 2019). The model would explain this on the basis of all such objects being subject to the same spatial pressure.

Deriving Newton’s Inverse Square Law from Geometry and Space Deletion


Newton’s equations from the 17th century provided the dominant description of gravity for about 250 years, until Einstein’s general relativity was developed. The Newtonian formulation still gives calculations that are sufficiently accurate for most common situations (Siegel 2019, October). The inverse square law, by which acceleration is reduced with the square of distance, is still a dominant concept, and applies to electromagnetism as well as gravity. Corrections to Newton’s concepts that have been provided by general relativity, such as that gravitational information is transmitted at the speed of light rather than instantaneously, are also consistent with the model and will be discussed below (see 6.1 and 6.2).

/


Figure 3: A cutaway of a sphere, hollow to show one “shell” of surface area


The geometrical derivation presented here is not original, however combining it with the concept of space deletion is, and this adds a mechanism to explain gravity. Classical gravitational equations are included in this article for convenient reference, and to show their consistency with the “Waves of Space” model. Consider the gravitational field of an object at theoretical rest (that term will be used since there is no absolute rest) to consist of concentric spherical “shells” of space at different radii, one of which is simulated in Figure 3 above, which is not to scale. Unlike the appearance in the figure, each “shell” is conceived as only one “volon” thick. The figure shows that each concentric spherical “shell” of surface area occupies three dimensions, with thickness dr due to being constructed from minimal but finite “volon” units of space. In Euclidean geometry, the equation for the surface of a sphere (and thus of each “shell” of space around a mass object) is 4πr2. The volume of each “shell” should therefore be 4πr2dr.

The amount of mass determines the quantity of units of space (“volons”) per second pulled inward from the “shell,” to replace the units deleted by the mass. Since the mass does not change, the same number of units of space moves inward per second from every “shell” (and therefore at every radius) toward the center of gravity. However, the removal of the same number of space units has different effects at different distances, because every radius from the center of gravity defines a spherical “shell” with volume 4πr2 dr. As the radius increases, that fixed number of units becomes a smaller and smaller fraction of the total units in the “shell.”

The strength of the effect of loss of space units (i.e., the strength of the gravitation, and hence of gravitational acceleration) depends on the ratio consisting of the number of units to be removed divided by the total units in the shell. Since the “shell” volume includes the square of the radius, the gravitational acceleration is divided by r2 just as in Newton’s equation (3). As an example, if 20% of the space units in the “shell” at radius r were to flow inward each second to replace space deletion, the same number of space units would be only 5% of the “shell” at a radius of 2r, because the 20% would be divided by 22 or 4. The 4π dr in the equation for the volume of each “shell” is a constant (assuming “volon” width dr is always the same), and is simply absorbed as a component of G, the gravitational constant.

In order to derive Newtonian equations, it is helpful to temporarily veer away from the concept as discussed above of mass as a wave property, and to think instead of mass m as a property of matter that can attract other units of matter. Newton’s equation for the force between two such masses is F= Gm1*m2/r2. In this equation, mass m1 attracts mass m2, and they are multiplied by a gravitational constant G (big G) and divided by the square of the radius (distance between their centers of gravity). The gravitational acceleration g (small g) can be derived from this and Newton’s

second law of motion equation (Helmenstine 2013) for F, mechanical force (F = ma, or in this case mg, a moving mass multiplied by its acceleration). Combining these two equations, F=mg = Gm1*m2/r2. One mass cancels out, and we are left with the well-known Newtonian equation (3) in which the acceleration toward a single mass is due to that mass alone, let us say m1. Since each mass attracts the other, the equation applies reciprocally for the acceleration toward mass m2, by substituting that mass into the equation.

g=Gm /r2	(3)


This is an unusual equation for acceleration, because time is not included, even in the units for the gravitational constant, G. Acceleration is traditionally defined as velocity/time or distance/time squared. The mass in F=ma is inertial, whereas the masses in Gm1*m2/r2 are gravitational, so this algebraic cancellation implies a degree of acceptance of Einstein’s Principle of Equivalence that the two are equivalent. Later on, the association of inertial and gravitational effects will be explained (see 6.3). Equation (3) is included here with the perspective that this acceleration is due to space deletion by the attracting mass m, and that the mass quality or lack of it in the falling entity is mathematically irrelevant when we are calculating the attraction toward only a single mass. On the other hand, each mass will fall toward the other, and they should meet somewhere in-between.

As the radius increases, moving away from the center of gravity of the mass object, the volume of each concentric “shell” away from the attracting mass object is successively larger (due to the increasing surface area), and the fixed amount of space to be removed from each “shell” becomes a successively smaller proportion of the “shell” volume. The strength of the effect of the space in-flow decreases with the square of the radius, and the gravitational force and acceleration decrease

similarly. Conversely, as the object with the mass is approached and the radius decreases, the volume of each concentric shell is successively smaller in each concentric “shell” closer to the attracting mass. The fixed amount of space flowing in from the “shells” becomes a greater proportion of the total shell volume, and dividing by the square of the smaller radius causes less of a reduction, So gravitational force and acceleration are weaker when the mass object is farther and stronger when it is closer. How “volons” leave “shells” to flow inward toward a mass will be discussed in the next subsection.

Space as a Medium; “Gravitational Field Waves” and how They May Oscillate, and “Free Volons”

Volons” can be involved in group action that has been termed “volon mechanics,” including participation in waves. Space composed of “volons” has also been described as the medium for waves to move through space, including those that express the properties of matter and energy. Waves involve oscillation, so the question arises, how do “volons” oscillate and how do such oscillations act as waves? Other questions that have not yet been answered include what happens and how gaps, compression, or enlargement of “volons” are avoided when “volons” are deleted or pulled in to replace deletions, why a column of “volons” reaching throughout the gravitational field does not instantaneously move in as a single body when one is deleted or pulled inward, why the replacement process propagates outward through the universe at the speed of light?

“Volons” are conceived of as being incompressible, because compression would change the amount of space they occupy, which would alter their identity as the units of space. They should likewise not be expandable. There should not be empty gaps between “volons,” since with no space

between them there could be nothing to fill such a gap. However, it may be possible for “volons” to be pushed momentarily into different shapes and configurations with the same volumes, and there might be elasticity bringing them back to a usual form and causing a shape oscillation.

A hypothesis is offered here as one possible way to answer all these questions, including how gravitational effects could disseminate in a wave-like manner at the speed of light. “Volons” surrounding matter (which is composed of other “volons” organized into matter waves) are proposed to act as components of “shells” surrounding masses, one “volon” thick, as has already been suggested (see 5.2). As mentioned in the last subsection, each “shell” has the volume of the spherical surface multiplied by the thickness of one “volon” (4 π r2dr).

When some “volons” are deleted or pulled inward from a gravitational “shell,” the circumference of the “shell” losing “volons” becomes momentarily smaller and therefore the “shell” moves closer to the mass causing the gravitation, at a smaller radius, replacing the next inner “shell.” At the same time, that next inner “shell” it replaces has also lost “volons” and is moving further closer to the mass. As the “volons” of each “shell” are replenished by “volons” moving inward from the next external “shell,” the circumference size of replenished “shells” is restored and they all move back toward their previous radii.

Each of the various steps in this process is presumed to take time: “volons” moving from ”shell” to “shell,” “volons” within a “shell” closing in or separating to adjust as other “volons” move in and out, and “shells” moving closer or further from a mass. If “volons” have some sort of elasticity, any shape bending and shape restoration that might be needed for a “shell” to alternately

lose and absorb “volons” would also require time. These processes could not exceed the speed of light, which as mentioned earlier (see 2.2) is an inherent property of space.

The continual inward-outward fluctuation of “shells” could involve all of the concentric “shells” and could produce an oscillation of the entire gravitational field, which we shall call a “gravitational field wave,” inward and outward in an undulation. This would function like a longitudinal traveling wave, however when “volons” oscillated between two “shells,” there would be no midway equilibrium position, unlike other types of waves. The oscillation would propagate outward into the universe as the gravitational field, at the speed of light, carrying with it any new gravitational information if the object is changing orientation and direction, and forming new functional “shells” as it went.

Electromagnetism and gravitation are the two main phenomena believed to propagate at the speed of light in space with negligible matter content, it should not be surprising for both to include within their waves much slower processes. Electromagnetic waves have finite and variable wave frequencies. Similarly, in waves involving “volon” oscillation, individual “volons” are presumed to travel at finite rates, and waves constituting matter and moving past other “volons” (see 9.3) in mechanical motion cannot reach the speed of light (see 6.1). Mass in a gravitational process is quantified by the rate of matter-associated space deletion and of drawing in of replacement “volons.”

The propagation of a gravitational field from a mass outward through space is somewhat analogous to a ripple effect in water disseminating outward from the location of a dive or a pebble drop. A difference from most classical waves is that nothing would radiate outward except the propagation itself, which could change directions if the mass moved to a new location. The field

would involve space units moving inward toward the mass rather than outward away from it. These adjustments will be called “gravitational field waves,” to avoid confusion.

The hypothetical “gravitational field waves” are totally different from what physicists currently call gravitational waves, which are thought to be ripples in spacetime generated by movements of extremely massive bodies like binary pulsars, neutron stars, and black holes (Kulkarni & Thwaites 2023). The hypothetical “graviton,” which is supposed to be the boson particle for such waves (see 7.3), is the only particle predicted by the “standard model” that has not been found. It is missing along with a workable quantum theory of gravity (Elert 2023, Sutton 2025). That might be because the graviton does not exist, and gravity operates instead by the mechanisms proposed in this model and described above.

If the mass generating a “gravitational field wave” changes its direction of motion, the direction of the-movement of “volons” will keep adjusting, toward the new front position of the mass. The direction of propagation of the “shell” oscillations and the shape and orientation of the gravitational field will also change accordingly. Every independently moving object with the space-deleting quality of mass, even an insect, would produce a progression of space moving inward, and oscillation of “shells,” however miniscule the effect.

The actual deletion of space by matter occurs where “volons” encounter the associated mass.

Mathematically, all the locations of deletion will average out so that the center of gravity can represent the source, just as in Newtonian gravity.

Space units that are not incorporated in standing waves of matter or energy (though they are likely part of extended gravitational and/or electromagnetic fields) can be considered as “free

volons.” “Free volons” make up the vast majority of the universe, the space between bodies of matter, through which the standing waves of matter can travel without friction. According to this concept, some “free volons” are also found in matter, where they serve several important roles. They are pushed into matter by spatial pressure or by impact from the motion of matter. They fill gaps between (and possibly within) the matter structures formed by standing waves. “Free volons” are the ones most susceptible to deletion by mass, or to out-flow toward bodies with greater amounts of mass.
They are also the raw material of space restoration to replace the “volons” that were deleted or that flowed out. When “volons” were removed from standing waves, the restoration process involves incorporation of “free volons” to repair or reconstruct those waves (see 6.4). “Volons” that are incorporated into standing matter or mass waves might be preferentially though not totally spared from deletion and transfer to the other dimensions, compared with “free volons.” If so, that would help to maintain the structural integrity of matter in gravitational fields. When matter waves come into contact with each other, friction and other well-known interactions of mechanics occur.

Alternative Theories of Gravity, and “Dark Matter”


A number of scientists have proposed similar ideas on gravity in the past. According to Swedish physicist Ove Tedenstig (1990) in a self-published book: “It turns out that the gravitation is actuated by an inflow process of matter from the environmental space.“ He did not, however, specify whether there is an inflow of space itself.

At least three additional scientists have proposed that gravitation results from space flowing into matter, but their models differ from each other and from that presented in this article. Yevgeniy Kutanov (2014) offered a thought experiment in which space is made up of compressible cells. He

proposed that elementary particles of ordinary matter act like “small black holes,” absorbing space and making it disappear. The absorbed space converts to energy and matter and is an endless source of both, but does not apparently affect the size of the particles. It is not clear in that model how that influx of space affects objects with the mass property and light, which are attracted by ordinary black holes. He suggested that in contrast to ordinary matter, antimatter particles could act as “small white holes” that emit space. Kutanov attempted to draw implications for particle repulsion and strong and weak interactions. He provided considerable math as well as diagrams in support of his model. An apparent weakness in this theory is the lack of evidence for the increased matter and energy to which the absorbed space converts.

Lindner (2012) described gravity as a fluid-like flow of space into matter. He added later (2015) that gravity is due to the absorption of space by matter. He did not suggest a mechanism or an explanation of what becomes of the space. Reginald Cahill (2017) claimed that experimental data going back to the 1933 work of Dayton Miller, an ether supporter, showed an inflow of space into the sun, where it was presumably absorbed. He implied that such space absorption was the cause of gravity.

“Dark matter,” the currently unexplained source of extra gravitation that cannot be associated with visible mass, was first reported by Jacobus Kapteyn in 1922 and has been an enigma for more than a century (Lieu 2024). It is estimated to produce over five times as much gravity as ordinary matter (Betz 2020; Ghosh 2017), and is thought to keep galaxies from flying apart (Clavin 2020), but does not emit, reflect, or absorb light, or respond to electromagnetism, and interacts with the rest of the universe only by gravity. Marmet (1989) proposed that “dark matter” could be explained by

hydrogen molecules in space, but there has not been confirmation of association with particular particles or wave forms. It does seem to be concentrated in localized areas of space.

There is no essential or inherent requirement in the “Waves of Space” model for the deletions of space that define gravitation to be caused only by mass associated with matter as we know it. “Dark matter” might better be termed “dark gravity,” because it does not seem to exhibit other properties of matter such as charge, or to be associated with coherent bodies of matter, i.e. “volon” wave clusters. No known type of matter has been definitely associated with it. Richard Lieu (2014) has proposed that no matter may be involved at all, and that the gravitation may be produced by spherical “shells” of mass, also described as topological defects in space. Additional causes of space deletion, such as vortices generated by the space expansion that are not concentrated into stars or planets and may not be constructed of matter, could be proposed.

The “Waves of Space” model recognizes a parallel between “dark matter” and other phenomena in which mass may be dissociated from its matter, involving breakdowns of matter waves (see 9.5). This dissociation seems mysterious to us because it is not known to occur in our ordinary experience, but the destruction of matter with retention of mass by black holes (see 9.5) seems not to be an uncommon assumption by physicists (Impey 2021; Sutter 2022). Although mass has been defined here as a wave property associated with matter that involves space deletion (see 1.6), there is no prohibition by the model against its also existing separately from matter. In special relativity, mass is also associated with energy, e.g., E=mc2. Other theories of “dark matter” could be compatible with the model, but the concept of mass waves separated from matter seems to be a plausible contender (see 9.5). Mass that is not derived from an association with matter is theorized in general relativity to instead be associated with energy (see 6.1).

RELATIVITY, SPACE DELETION IN MOVING BODIES, AND NON-UNIFORM GRAVITATIONAL FIELDS

In Section 5, we presented a new hypothesis for the nature of gravity, based on deletion of space by matter with the wave property of mass, and showed that this would cause the same diminution of gravitational acceleration with the square of distance as in Newton’s equations. We considered the effects of space deletion on moving bodies. Now, we shall further consider those effects and how they may interact with the predictions of special and general relativity. Of particularly interest are proposed alternative mechanisms, for the Lorentz transformations and for the increase in inertia of a rapidly moving body. We shall also look at just how equivalent inertial and gravitational mass really are.

Relativity Theories: Geometry, Gravity, and What Space Deletion May Offer


Both special and general relativity were brilliantly conceived by Albert Einstein and further developed by other prominent physicists in the 20th century. The experimentally confirmed findings consistent with relativity theories will not be challenged, and some will be reviewed to show how the present model is also consistent with them (see 6.5). Instead, the “Waves of Space” model will provide an alternative way of thinking about the same findings. It is modestly suggested that they might be explainable by a different, simpler, yet comprehensive model, one more easily united with quantum theory.

Both special and general relativity theories describe geometric representations of space and time, combined into spacetime. In special relativity, linear measurements and time vary with velocity.

In general relativity, they also vary with gravitation. In special relativity, rapid velocity also produces an increase in mass. These features will be discussed later (see 6.2).

Special relativity, introduced by Einstein in 1905, applies to inertial motion but not to gravity. The theory requires that the laws of physics be the same in all inertial frames of reference (Principle of Relativity), and that the speed of light also be the same in all inertial frames of reference (Light Postulate). The Principle of Relativity requires that all linear steady motion be relative (Einstein 1921). Spacetime in special relativity is “flat,” whereas it is curved in general relativity. Therefore, special relativity only is valid locally, where the curvature is inconsequential and can be ignored.
Special relativity is considered to be an incomplete theory, since every object with mass does have gravitation.

The requirement that the speed of light be equal “in all inertial frames of reference” causes light to always be faster by the same velocity, c, than a moving body that the light passes or from which light is emitted, as judged from that moving body’s frame of reference (Einstein 1921; Norton 1924, January). Not only can no material body reach the speed of light, but observers in its frame of reference will not even be able to tell if they have reached a fraction of that speed, The Lorentz transformations that produce these changes will be discussed in the next sub-section (see 6.2). The “Waves of Space” model accepts the Light Postulate but sees it as an effect of these transformations rather than vice versa, with the transformations having been caused by space deletion.

General relativity, introduced by Einstein a decade later, is predominantly a complex geometrical theory of gravitation (Einstein 1921). In that theory, which is mathematically challenging and involves ten tensors, four-dimensional spacetime (which is considered essential to the theory) is

warped by mass and energy, creating curved geodesic lines. Gravity is not a true force, but rather is the curvature or warping of spacetime produced by mass or energy. A number of predictions of the theory and confirmatory tests will be discussed later (see 6.5). Norma Sanchez (2019) considered general relativity, because it is non-quantum, to also be an incomplete theory, “a particular approximation from a more complete theory yet to be achieved.”

In relativity theories, energy should have its own gravitational effects, since mass is equivalent to energy. However, that is not a significant consideration in the “Waves of Space” model, because gravitation-like effects would be caused by different mechanisms. For example, light could be bent by gravitation not because of mass or gravitational potential energy of its own, but because the space through which it travels is moving in toward a mass, carrying both mass and energy along with it. Heating a material object supposedly causes a slight increase in weight because the heat energy increases gravitation. However, that may be a mass-like effect of increased space deletion, caused because increased molecular motion brings more space in contact with the molecules, allowing more “volons” to be deleted (as with “relativistic mass,” see 6.3). Besides, objects do not need to have their own gravitational mass in order to fall in a gravitational field, as falling is due to the gravitation of only the mass toward which the falling occurs (see 5.2).

In general relativity, there are geodesics in the curved space describing the paths of objects moving due to gravity. These paths are curved due to the space curvature. It seems to be less clear what in general relativity actually causes objects to fall, i.e., how the curved space causes objects to move along those geodesics, since gravity is not a force in that theory.

Relativity theories also seem to accept almost unlimited reductions in sizes or shapes of matter, e.g., shortening of lengths with velocities approaching that of light (see 6.2), and reductions in overall size to the extent of a “singularity” at a “Big Bang” (see 4.2) or in a black hole (see 9.5). In those theories, there is little concern about, or mechanisms offered for, how the components of matter (be they waves or hypothetical particles) could exist and maintain any functions under such extreme conditions (Marmet 2001). Even if the assumption is that the “standard model” would not yet exist in a “Big Bang’s” “singularity” or would break down in a black hole’s “singularity,” those do not seem to be adequate excuses for failure to deal with these problems. One would think that general relativity should at least include descriptions of what happens to matter as it emerges from or approaches such a state. These are among the continuing objections to relativity theories (see 6.6), in spite of experimental evidence consistent with them (see 6.5).

The current model rejects “singularities” and particles altogether (see 2.6 and 7.1). It attributes reductions in size to deletion of “volons,” and accepts that there can be a limit at which waves have lost too many of them to retain the functions of matter (see 9.5).

General relativity shares with Newtonian theory the limitation that they both describe mathematical relationships but not why all of those relationships exist. They thus both fail to fulfill Aristotle’s criteria for high science, i.e., that it explain both facts and causes (Bouchier 1901).

The “Waves of Space” model applies to frames of reference with or without significant gravity, both locally and throughout the universe, in our familiar three dimensions (though with additional, unseen dimensions for space transfer). This may turn out to be a more comprehensive yet mathematically simpler concept of space, time, gravity, and the effects of rapid velocities. A future

adaptation might have a potential to contribute to substitution of one new theory for two current relativity theories, and to permit a better correlation with quantum theory.

Effects of Space Deletion on Moving Bodies, a Mechanism for the Lorentz Transformations and Non-uniformity

Figure 4 below can assist in visualization of the effects of space deletion in a body in motion, including effects on the body’s gravitational field. The body is pictured as a spaceship. The figure is hypothetical and not to scale but illustrates some key concepts about the gravitation of moving bodies. It represents a snapshot at a given instant in time, as a spaceship moved at close to the speed of light. The concentric but off-center circles represent three-dimensional spheres. Each shows the outer margin of the gravitational field (which can be thought of as the wave front of a “gravitational field wave” front) that was initiated at six separate consecutive (but not continuous) times T1 through T6. The consecutive positions where the spaceship was when it initiated the gravitational signals are shown more faintly, each in the center of its circle and likewise labeled T1 through T6. The spaceship is depicted as shortened by the Lorentz transformations as viewed from a separate frame of reference. Gravitational attraction toward a moving body would be toward the location where the body was when it emitted the gravitational information, and not toward the body’s current location.

Circles initiated earlier are shown as larger because the wave front has had more time to propagate outward. The circles have different colors, to represent a reduction in the concentration of gravitation with the square of the distance from the center of where the body was when the gravitational. Because larger circles have larger radii, they have reduced gravitational intensity.

The gravitational wave fronts are moving at the speed of light, while the spaceship is moving at a slightly slower speed, so all of the circles reach space in front of the ship. The forward portions of the circles are closer together, because the ship is traveling almost as fast. Behind the moving body, the circles are farther apart, because the gravitational effects have been left behind, in addition to being reduced by the square of the radius. Each wave front was delayed en route by the speed of light, but the figure is meant as a sort of snapshot view, to show where the wave fronts have reached as of “now” as perceived from the current position of the spaceship. So regardless of those delays, and despite the weaker gravitation in the waves originating from posterior positions, it is evident that the concentration of “gravitational field waves” (and hence of gravitation itself) is greater in front and less in back of the spaceship. Note that all processes that this figure represents in two dimensions actually extend out into three dimensions.


Figure 4: The concept of a rapidly moving object developing a non-uniform gravitational field as it approaches the speed of light; not to any scale. (Assisted by Dennis Polis; interpretation by the author)

In this model, the deletion of space is produced by mass, and therefore in the figure it is taking place within the spaceship location at each time (and the quantum distributions of its own matter waves), rather than in the circles themselves, however in-motion of “volons” to replace the deletions and each other will take place within the circles, and that will be more concentrated in front of the spaceship. As with a drain or a jet engine, at a rapid velocity the mass encounters more space to delete (see 5.1 and 6.3), but the only available space moving in to restore the deletion is that within the concentrated portion of the gravitational field represented by the circles. That field is conceptualized as the volume of space in which inward motion of units of space would be replacing deletion, as the body progressed to successive positions.

Although Figure 4 only represents the object’s own gravity, and not that of an extremely massive external object or a black hole, the concentration of gravitational effects should have physical effects on the moving object itself. Because a moving object’s gravitation has effects on itself, this could be considered as a type of self-interaction.

The impact of space against mass can occur from opposite directions. Spatial pressure can force space toward an object. However, an object can also move against space, and if so will encounter more space in front of it, analogous to the breeze a motorcyclist feels by driving through the air. This will lead to more deletions of that space, analogous to more air entering the engines of a rapidly moving jet airplane, but also to more in-flow of external “volons” to replace the deletions and

each other. The “Waves of Space” model suggests that the effects of the increased space deletion and restoration processes in moving objects should cause three main concurrent and inter related effects, which can be distinguished by where the space is being deleted. These effects will be referred to in the remainder of this subsection and the next.

General increased space deletion and restoration, related to inertia and mass: As described

above, as a result of increased space deletion, concentration of the in-motion of space to replace deletions will be greater in front of the object and less behind it. The resulting spatial pressure difference will push the moving object forward, but should be balanced by effect “c,” cancelling some of the forward motion. Those balanced forces are suggested to result in inertia, preserving steady, non-accelerating motion. Inertia will be discussed in the next subsection (see 6.3). Since space deletion is proposed to be the main effect of mass, increased space deletion should mimic an increase in mass with velocity, a complex issue that will also be discussed in the next subsection (see 6.3). :
Space deletion and delayed restoration within the moving object, related to Lorentz length

shortening: Deletion of space within the length of objects in the axis of front to back is

proposed as the mechanism for these transformations. This must be combined with space restoration within matter that is slower than the pace of deletion but should maintain an equilibrium in the percentage of lag. Shortening in the Lorentz contractions will be explained below in this sub-section; three-dimensional size reduction in intense gravitation will be addressed later (see 6.4).
Deletion and in-flow of space that is being or has been traversed, related to inertia and time

dilation:

The least intuitive effect is that space deletion and inward movement of “volons” in the replacement process can involve distances that an object is traveling or has already traveled. This is somewhat analogous to being on a treadmill, in which the backward motion of the belt cancels forward motion. This effect is considered to be crucial in maintaining balanced forces in inertia, and in preventing the velocity of matter from reaching the speed of light. It also is the proposed mechanism for time dilation with velocity. Both will be discussed in the next subsection (see 6.3).

The Lorentz transformation of length (effect “b”) permits the speed of light relative to a moving body to be measured as constant when observed from the frame of reference of the moving object. The transformations also include slowing of clock speed, effect “c” (see 6.3). Both transformations utilize a “gamma factor” (Koks 2012) that occurs ubiquitously in special relativity: γ=1/(1–v2/c2)1/2.

This factor can be derived in several different ways, and mainly depends on an observer in a separate reference frame from a moving object, and on c being a constant (Kataru 2019). Those conditions are easily met by the “Waves of Space” model (c being a property of the space substance, the limiting speed through space), so calculations based on the model should yield the same “gamma factor” and the same results as in special relativity. For both gravity and rapid velocity, the changes would not be apparent to the traveler and would need to be judged from a separate frame of reference (Einstein 1921).

The Lorentz transformations are negligible at slow velocities, but become significant when traveling at great velocity approaching c. The dilation of time with velocity (also discussed in the next

subsection) has been experimentally confirmed, but confirmation of length contraction may be lacking in experimental evidence (Zyga 2012).

The model provides a mechanism to explain the Lorentz shortening of length (effect “b”). The moving object would encounter more space to be deleted at its front, and the rest of the body would continually move into this anterior region of increased deletion. At any speed, but becoming significant as a moving object approached the speed of light, some “volons” of space would be deleted within the moving object, mostly in the axis from front to back. In that axis, the increased number of “volons” encountered by the moving object due to its motion would be consumed by increased deletion of space, and restoration of the deletion. The latter would be slowed by the need for reconstruction of waves depleted by the increased deletion,

Length restoration within a moving body of matter should require some reconstruction of waves that lost “volons” during deletion, and therefore is likely to be a slower process than space deletion, dependent in part on the volume of matter needing reconstruction. Since volume is 4/3 π r3, that portion of the process should be inversely proportion to the cube rather than the square of the radius of the matter (see 6.4). Upon reaching a steady rate of velocity, there would be a percentage of length reduction because of the lag of restoration behind deletion of length along the axis. An equilibrium in the proportion of shortened length should develop. A somewhat similar lag could occur in connection with gravitational size reduction (see 6.4).

Length would be restored with deceleration, presumably due to reduced space deletion and a concurrent decrease the in-flow of external space for restoration. Since matter is represented as

consisting of three-dimensional waves, shortening of a moving body in only the axis of motion implies that one-dimension changes in deletion and restoration can occur.

Although the measured changes occurring in a body approaching the speed of light should be the same in the “Waves of Space” model as in the Lorentz transformation of special relativity, there would be a difference. In special relativity theory, if the relative motion of two frames of reference were close to the speed of light, an observer on either frame would detect the transformations in the other frame and could consider him/herself to be at rest, with both observations equally valid. That part of the theory has never been experimentally confirmed.

In the current model, motion is “real” (see 9.4). The transformations would be “real” as well, only occurring in bodies that were “really” moving, although both the motion and the transformations could only be detected and measured relative to other frames of reference. Two bodies moving toward one another could each exhibit “real” changes in length and size that would be additive. The changes would be reversible with deceleration to slower velocities, which would permit increased space restoration.

In addition to shortening the moving object itself, this effect would cause concentric gravitational wave fronts immediately in front of it to become closer together than those behind it, as illustrated in Figure 4, because some of the space between them would be deleted. As with other velocity-related changes, the distances should be restored with deceleration.

Deletion and restoration are both theoretically proportional to the object’s mass as well as to its velocity. Mass in both the numerator and denominator would cancel out (and therefore mass does

not appear as a factor in the equations of the Lorentz transformations), leaving the velocity in relation to the speed of light as the main determinant regarding the proportion of length reduction.

The time slowing (dilation) of the Lorentz transformations would be due to effect “c” of space deletion in a moving body, deletion of space being traversed or that had already been traversed. The dilation of time can be conceptualized by imagining an analog clock attached to the moving object. If space were removed from the distance that the clock hands were in the process of moving or had already moved, it would slow the forward progression of measured time. Space deleted in front of the motion of clock would merely maintain the current velocity of the clock (inertia), and would be unrelated to shortening. A similar deletion and consequent slowing would occur in any other type of time device within the moving body, including the movement of electrons in atomic clocks, and there would also be slower aging within a living organism as has been experimentally confirmed (Marder 1971). Upon deceleration, time passage would speed up and the rate of further aging would increase, but the reduced aging during the period at higher velocity could not be changed.

Inertia and Gravitation in Moving Bodies

Newton in the late 17th century made inertia his first law of motion, stating that every object at rest remains at rest, and every object in motion remains in motion at the same speed and direction, until acted on by external forces (Helmenstine 2013). The physics pioneers of that era borrowed from one another. This law and the concept of inertia had actually been stated earlier in that century by Johannes Kepler and by others before him. Newton also established that mass objects approach one another through gravitation, but that had previously been proposed by Kepler (McMullin 2002).

These concepts of inertia and gravitation might seem to be separate phenomena, but Einstein made the universal association of gravitational and inertial mass his Principle of Equivalence. This is an underlying assumption in general relativity, also referred to by Einstein as the law of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass (Einstein 1921; Gundlach & Ross 2023). This equivalence has agreed with all scientific observations, but none of the writings of Newton, Kepler, or Einstein actually explain why inertia should be in lock-step with gravitation.

The Waves of Space model suggests a common origin for gravitation and inertia related to space deletion. The proposal here is that the essential link between gravitation and inertia is that they both result from the space deletion, however minimal, from an object’s own mass. Inertia and gravitation are the two properties associated with mass in physics equations. They should always be related, because they both are effects of the same space deletion caused by the same mass.

Newton’s first law of motion is all about inertia, but in his second law, F=ma or a=F/m, an interesting feature is that it allows the continued application of a steady, non-accelerating force to produce acceleration (Helmenstine 2013). The suggested explanation here is that during every increment of time, the continued force adds to the inertial velocity already achieved.

Alternative concepts related to inertia and gravitation have been proposed by others. Amrit Sorli also concluded that inertial and gravitational mass have the same origin, but rather than speaking of space deletion, his concept was diminished energy density in a three-dimensional “quantum” space (Zyga 2012). Paul Marmet (2001) claimed differences between inertial and gravitational acceleration, among them that inertial but not gravitational acceleration creates stresses inside the accelerating body.

In Newton’s first law, inertia does not require any forces whatsoever, but the conception in this model is that instead there are forces, but they are balanced. Non-uniform space deletion, greater in the front of a moving object than in the rear (see Figure 4), could result in greater spatial pressure behind the object than in front of it, and produce a force toward the front of the moving object. If this were not balanced in some way, there would be acceleration rather than inertia. It could be balanced, however, by the deletion of space traversed by the object (effect “c” in the previous subsection). If that effect is not sufficient to produce a precise balance consistent with inertia, additional deletion effects may supplement. The inertia of theoretical rest would be preserved by symmetry of space deletions in all directions, a special circumstance applying the same physical model.

Mathematically, the “gamma factor” prevents velocity from ever reaching c because 1–v2/c2 would be zero and dividing by zero gives an “undefined” quotient. The “Waves of Space” model suggests a possible mechanism. As a body would accelerate to approach the speed of light, more and more of the ”volons” of space it had already traversed would be deleted within the body (the same distribution as the shortening in the Lorentz transformation). Further acceleration would become more and more difficult, because more of the forward motion would be cancelled, setting forward progress back (effect “c” in the previous subsection). Inertia would increase with each increment in velocity, because of balanced increases in both the forward and backward forces producing it (effect “a”).

Increased velocity would make it more and more difficult to either accelerate or decelerate the body. Everyone knows that it is harder to stop a rapidly moving ball than a slow one. The closer a body comes to the speed of light, the more its increase in inertia should resist changing its velocity.
Space in front of the body would also be deleted, but that would merely maintain current velocity. As

with the Lorentz transformations, at each velocity, an equilibrium would be reached between deletion and restoration of space, maintaining the current velocity and inertia.

If an object were nevertheless somehow able to reach the speed of light (impossible as far as we know), it would lose so many of its “volons” due to space deletion that it would no longer be able to maintain its wave structure as matter. Despite this, it might theoretically retain its inertia and therefore presumably its mass, requiring a dissociation between matter and its mass as discussed elsewhere (see 5.4 and 9.5).

The total energy of the moving object increases (due to the increase in the kinetic component) as acceleration increases velocity, and is called relativistic energy. It is also sometimes referred to as “relativistic mass.” Since in this model mass deletes space, increased space deletion suggests an increased mass-like function, also associated with an increase in inertia as has just been discussed.
However, in the equation for relativistic energy, E=γ1/2mv2,, there is no indication that the mass must increase if the velocity increases, and if energy remains constant, an increase in velocity should require a decrease in mass. On the other hand, in the equation E=mc2, if energy increases, so must mass. One argument for relativistic mass is that the masses of neutrons and protons are thought to come mostly from the kinetic energy of its constituent quarks and gluons (see 7.3), because the estimated rest masses of the quarks would be much too small and gluons are supposedly massless (Sundermier 2016).

If mass increases with velocity, it is not rest or invariant mass. Rest or invariant mass can be considered as “real” mass, because it is the mass function that is inherent in the quantity of matter, whether it moves or not. In the water drain analogy, it represents the size of the hypothetical “drain”

for space deletion, which does not increase if more water goes down the drain. Applying that perspective, the mass effects of increased velocity could be considered as an artifact (Roche 2004). However, that distinction is partly semantic (Fowler 2024), because that artifact can be defined as a type of mass, as it is in special relativity.

The term and concept of “relativistic mass” seems to be falling out of favor. Many physics students are no longer taught it. Some particle physicists reportedly dislike the idea of variable mass, questioning where that mass could be stored as the moving object actually gets shorter (Koks 2012; Fowler 2024). Physics historian John Roche said (2004) that it is impossible to properly measure mass during rapid motion, and that by the early 21st century, modern nuclear and particle physics made no reference to “relativistic mass” and about 60% of recent authors writing on special relativity did not introduce it. He added that Einstein in his later years no longer referred to it, and said in 1948 said that “no clear definition can be given…It is better to introduce no other mass than the ‘rest mass…’

Eli Manor (2015), another physician interested in the philosophy of physics, proposed that inertia and gravitation but not mass increase with velocity, and that there is a relativistic increase in the gravitational “constant,” giving a false impression of mass increase. According to particle physicist Don Lincoln (2023), “relativistic mass” is a pedagogical invention that does not conform to reality.” Roche (2004) concluded that “Clearly, “relativistic mass,” m = m0√1−v2/c2 , or m = γ m0, is not a well-defined concept, and seems to be no more than a mathematical artefact.”

If mass actually did increase with velocity, an increased gravitational field effect would be expected, which would be difficult to test and has not apparently been experimentally

observed. Lincoln says that velocity should not increase the gravitational field. If a gravitational effect does exist toward a moving body, it might cause an unevenly distributed gravitational effect on other objects and light. This should be greater toward the front of the moving body where more concentrated space deletion and therefore more inward flow of “volons” to replace the deletions and each other was expected, and less toward the rear where more diluted space deletion was expected (see Figure 4). In contrast, a body at theoretical rest should produce uniform gravitational “pull,” the same from all directions. This is suggested as an area for further research to help resolve the issue.

One star in our Milky Way galaxy, S4714, is estimated to be moving at 8% of the speed of light (Gohd 2020). A review of observations of light bending and gravitational lensing might reveal whether there are differences in gravitational strength in in front vs. behind such a star. Another possible test would be to observe the rates of acceleration toward such a star of any nearby objects approaching from different directions.

6.4..Size and Time Changes Due to Gravity


In general relativity, gravity produces size reduction of matter, and dilation of time in material clocks, at theoretical rest on the surface or at any elevation in a gravitational field, if observed from another frame of reference. The greater the mass, and the closer a body of matter is to the mass generating the gravitational field, the stronger these effects should be, inversely proportional to a function of the radius from the center of gravity. What that function should be is about to be discussed. Both the size and time effects would reach an extreme when approaching a black hole (see 9.5).

Although gravitational time dilation has been experimentally confirmed (Gharat 2019; Redmond 2022), there appears to have been little experimental research on size reduction. Assuming that both effects really occur, the “Waves of Space” model permits a possible mechanism. For this subsection the following definitions should be helpful:

In-flow means “volons” pushed into matter by external spatial pressure.
Out-flow means “volons” pushed all the way through matter and out of it, toward another (usually larger) material object with mass. Many would be “free volons,” including those that flowed in, plus some from depletion of “free volons” in matter waves.
Deletion means the removal of “volons” by mass.

Restoration means all replacement of “volons” removed by out-flow and deletion, including both replenishment and reconstruction, using “volons” being supplied by in-flow.
Reconstruction means repair or correction of depletion of matter waves, from which “volons” were removed by out-flow or deletion.
Replenishment means restoration of lost “volons” that does not require reconstruction, e.g., the use of “free volons” from the in-flow to replace those in the out-flow.
Shrinkage means a decrease in volume of a material object due to the inability of restoration to keep up with the combined effects of deletion and outflow.

Although most of the volume defined by any material object is proposed to be occupied by standing matter waves, the model allows a limited but important penetrability of matter by “free volons.” In the solid and liquid states, there are gaps within and between molecules, particularly organic ones which can have intricate shapes, that are occupied by “free volons.” In the gas state,

molecules are separated by variable distances that depend on pressure, and the gaps between them are occupied by “free volons.” Some of the space deletion caused by mass probably occurs in the interior of matter rather than on its surface.

In a small material object, not moving rapidly, in a gravitational field around a larger object with much more mass, spatial pressure would push some “volons” into the matter. An almost equal number would flow out of the object and toward the large mass, where a large majority of the deletions of “volons” would occur. The “volons” flowing out of the small object would not necessarily all be the same ones that had just been pushed into it. A small amount of space deletion would occur within the small object due to its own gravitation. This in-flow and out-flow would be part of the cascade in which “volons” replace each other en route to replacing deletions. In-flows and out-flows might also oscillate in what has been proposed as gravitational field waves (see 5.3).

Although the “out-flow” would mostly consist of “free volons,” some “volons” would be pushed out of the matter waves. Some matter waves should be depleted of their full complement. Some of the in-flowing “volons” would therefore be utilized for reconstruction of those waves. As mentioned in connection with the Lorentz transformations (see 6.2), wave reconstruction should be a more complex and slower process than out-flow, deletion, or ordinary restoration of “volons.”

Because of the slowness of the reconstruction component, there would be a lag in the overall rate of “volon” restoration in matter, behind the combined rates of “volon” deletion and of out-flow from the matter. In weak gravitation, such as that produced by a small amount of matter or at great distances, this lag would be inconsequential. However, in very strong gravitation at short distances,

the significance of the lag would be increased, causing shrinkage, and also time dilation as will be explained below.

The basic rationale for the difference in rates is that it takes less time to pull things apart than to reconstruct them. The same in-flow of “volons” into matter is used for four processes: the out-flow, the limited deletion within the mass, the replenishment of “free volons” pushed out of the small body, and the reconstruction of depleted matter waves. The time lag would imply that an increased proportion of the in-flowing “volons” would be consumed than replaced, resulting in shrinkage. If for each 100 “volons” leaving a material body or deleted by its mass, only 95 were fully restored, there would be a 5% shrinkage in volume, and a corresponding dilation of time.

Within a three-dimensional material object, the rates of out-flow, deletion of “volons,” and replenishment would resemble deletions from “shells” of space. Each “shell” volume consists of a spherical surface 4πr2 multiplied by the single-“volon” thickness of the “shell,” dr, so division by the volume of each “shell” would include division by r2, following the inverse square law similar to gravity. However, whatever proportion of “volon” replacement required reconstruction would be dependent on the volume of the matter waves for which this is needed.

Equation (4) shows how integration (calculus definition) of multiple shells (left side), produces a volume that includes the cube of the radius (right side). In this case, rather than referring to “shells” of space surrounding a body of matter, on the left side we are imagining theoretical concentric “shells” inside of a spherical body of matter, with the integration limits being from zero at the center of gravity out to the radius at the surface.

V= ʃ4πr2 *dr=4/3π*r3	(4)


The volume of a sphere shown on the right side of equation (4) is proportional to the cube of the radius (4/3 π r3), rather than the square. Matter wave reconstruction should involve “volons” per volume of matter needing the reconstruction, and therefore might include a factor of division by r3. This could explain why reconstruction in matter would be slower than the rates of out-flow, deletion, or replenishment of “volons.” The percentage of total space restoration (replenishment plus reconstruction) that is made up of reconstruction should depend on the strength of gravitation, and therefore on the amount of mass and the distance from the center of gravity. There should be an equilibrium of the percentage of volume reduction between deletion and restoration, a stable proportion of shrinkage. This reduction should be partially restored if a material object were lifted to a higher radius from the center of gravity, because deletion and out-flow would be decreased, and so would the “volon” depletion of matter waves needing reconstruction.

There are two main differences between the size reduction of a material object in a gravitational field, and the shortening caused by velocity. The former would be three-dimensional rather than along only one axis. Also, more out-flow of “volons” would be occurring than space deletion.

Time dilation by gravitation would be due to deletion of time already traversed by clock hands or any other timing mechanism used. This would be analogous to time dilation (effect “c”) of the Lorentz transformations (see 6.3). Like size shrinkage, dilation of time would become significant only in powerful gravitation at short distances. At any degree of gravitation, the equilibrium between space deletion and restoration would determine the percentage of slowing of time and hence of aging.

If a material object were lifted to a higher radius from the center of gravity, an increased rate of space restoration would reduce time dilation and increase the rate of further aging, but could not change the reduced aging that had already elapsed during the time in stronger gravitation (Marder 1971).

6.5 Some Confirmed General Relativity Predictions Might Be Explained by the “Waves of Space” Model, or by Others

General relativity makes a number of predictions that have been verified experimentally, although some have required decades for technology to catch up with theory. As summarized in an editorial in Nature Physics (2019), general relativity attributes these changes to curvature or warping of space around masses. The “Waves of Space” model proposes similar effects, but on the basis of space deletion by gravitational masses.

In 1907, eight years before he released general relativity, Einstein concluded that light under the influence of a gravity “well” would experience a gravitational blueshift or shortening of wave length, and a gravitational redshift or lengthening of wave length after leaving that strong gravity. His explanation was based on gravitational time dilation affecting light frequency. Gravitational redshift and blueshift were confirmed by experiments in the 1950s and 1960s (Siegel 2022). Others have mistakenly attributed these shifts to a Doppler effect, which is understandable because the blueshift is often experienced while approaching a mass and the redshift while leaving it (Okun, Selivanov, &Telegdi 2019). However, the Doppler and gravitational wave length shifts are separate and additive effects (Siegel 2022). There have been a variety of additional explanations for gravitational blueshifts, including energy gain caused by gravity.

The present model can explain the gravitational blueshift by space between the wave crests being pulled in toward the center of gravity as part of the replacement of space deletion by the gravitational mass. This is in equilibrium with external space restoration, which however does not quite catch up with the in-pulling (see 5.1). By this rationale, the gravitational redshift is caused by weakened gravitational strength and a new equilibrium between in-pulling and restoration of space from the wavelengths at every increased radius.

The first proof for general relativity offered by Einstein was issued in 1915, the same year that he issued the theory, and was confirmed in 1919 (Editors, Nature Physics 2019). That was an explanation for an anomaly in the precession of the orbit of Mercury. The perihelion of an orbit is the location where the radius is smallest. Precession (slow change in rotational axis) of an elliptical orbit can be expected to occur if the body is not perfectly spherical, if there are any deviations from the inverse square law (Wells 2016), or if there are any gravitational distortions, e.g., due to other planets, mainly Jupiter and Saturn. But even accounting for all of these (though assuming instantaneous transmission of Jupiter’s and Saturn’s gravity), there was a tiny anomaly of 43 arc seconds per century to the precession in the perihelion of Mercury, which puzzled astronomers until 1915, when Einstein accounted for it and claimed this as the first successful test of general relativity (Wells 2016).

However, there appear to be alternative ways to explain that precession without dependence on either special or general relativity, because the same result has been claimed in at least three other ways. Paul Gerber in 1898 was the first to obtain the correct result, which was praised by prominent physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach and drew considerable attention at the time. However, his calculations were based on ad hoc assumptions, most notably that gravitational effects were

propagated at the speed of light, and they were criticized for having no basis in then-current theory and no proof (Wells 2016). Interest in the Gerber derivation evaporated after Einstein’s theory was released, but might be worth re-evaluation. Marmet (1999) also derived the same result as Einstein, using matter-energy conservation, but otherwise claiming to have based everything on Newtonian physics with no other aspects of relativity theories. He did calculate changes in length and clock speed, but attributed them to the changes in mass rather than the Lorentz transformations. More recently, Sorli with Davide Fiscaletti claim to have attained the same result using a three-dimensional quantum space model (Zyga 2012).

The “Waves of Space” model would expect Mercury to be shortened and its motion to take less clock time as it passed its perihelion, and meanwhile to be receiving gravitational effects from Jupiter and Saturn delayed by the speed of light. These effects might give Mercury’s precession a tiny boost with each revolution.

Time dilation increases in stronger and decreases in weaker gravity, as predicted by general relativity, and as also explained by this model (see 6.1 and 6.4). This was first confirmed experimentally in 1971, by flying atomic clocks around the world and comparing with clocks left on earth (Hafele &