


/



Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations
H. Javadia and F. Forouzbakhshb
Invited professor of the Faculty of Science at Azad Islamic University, Tehran campuses Tehran, Iran Javadi_hossein@hotmail.com
Academic Researcher, Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research and Technology, University of Tehran.
Tehran, Iran fforouz@ut.ac.ir



Abstract:
Modern physics is based on relativity and quantum mechanics. But there are some unanswered questions or complex concepts in modern physics. The questions that modern physics does not have answers for, and the physicists believe that it is due to the inability of theories. All our theories today seem to imply that the universe should contain a tremendous concentration of energy, even in the emptiest regions of space. For example; the gravitational effects of this so-called vacuum energy would have either quickly curled up the universe long ago or expanded it too much greater size. The Standard Model cannot help us understand this puzzle, called the cosmological constant problem [1]. This shows that the quantum mechanics problems are inseparable of relativity, because the cosmological constant was originally introduced by Einstein in cosmological equation.
For long time seemed the Friedmann equation is able to explain universe, but in recent years, the cosmological constant was of interest to cosmologists. However, these two equations are unable to explain before the Big Bang. Thus this paper, from a new approach, turns out to merge the fundamental principles of quantum physics, relativity and classical mechanics through a new definition of rest state of particles like photon, and attempts to present the reasons and the possibilities of the existence of the superluminal speeds. So according to this new view some complex concepts and unanswered questions is explained in this paper.

Keyword: sub quantum energy, graviton, photon, relativity, color charge, magnetism color, negative and positive virtual photon, Zero point energy, Singularity

Introduction
In this paper, two complex physical concepts, zero-point energy and singularity have been considered and analyzed. This review can be a step to combine general relativity and quantum mechanics.
Zero-point energy, also called quantum vacuum zero-point energy, is the lowest possible energy that a quantum mechanical physical system may have; it is the energy of its ground state. All quantum mechanical

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

systems undergo fluctuations even in their ground state and have an associated zero-point energy, a consequence of their wave-like nature. The uncertainty principle requires every physical system to have a zero-point energy greater than the minimum of its classical potential well. This results in motion even at absolute zero. For example, liquid helium does not freeze under atmospheric pressure at any temperature because of its zero-point energy [2, 3]. If the zero point energy in space (vacuum) exists, how can we explain the zero-point energy without using the uncertainty principle?
According to general relativity, the initial state of the universe, at the beginning of the Big Bang, was a singularity (with infinite density and zero volume). Both general relativity and quantum mechanics break down in describing the Big Bang. Despite its successes, the standard big bang theory was too simple to be complete. The Inflation Theory proposes a period of extremely rapid (exponential) expansion of the universe during its first few moments. It was developed around 1980 to explain several puzzles with the standard Big Bang theory, in which the universe expands relatively gradually throughout its history [4, 5, and 6]. My question is, if the universe collapses, will it reach to infinite density and zero volume? Or is there a force that will counteract it? That we have answered in this paper, according to reconsidering relativistic Newton's second law, the Big Bang is explained. Regarding the sub quantum energy, the Friedmann equation is reviewed. This view can be a step to combine the general relativity and quantum mechanics.

About particles concepts
We have almost the same understanding and imagination of large objects (at the level of molecules and larger). But in the case of subatomic particles, there is no clearly defined and visualized concept, and there are many uncertainties, especially in the case of photon and graviton. Therefore, any theory offers certain understanding (such as loop and string theories) of these particles. In discussion with my dear friend Daniel, we enjoyed his imagination. He wrote; "...since I consider gravity to be a localized phenomenon with rapid attenuation and to be a space deformation like the rubber sheet of Einstein, I maintain that gravitons are not particles -- indeed, I believe all bosons are a wavelike field phenomena. Even Higgs never proposed a Higgs particle -- he proposed the Higgs Field that "clusters" many wavelets to a denser state. He was a Field Theorist as I am. To me all is field and condensed energy moving wavelets at different frequencies." [7] According to this view, in this paper we are using the particles for quantum and sub quantum particles without any imagination of them.
As we know, some particles such as photons are never seen at rest in any reference frame. So, there are two kinds of particles in physics;
Some particles like the photon move only with the speed of light c, in all inertial reference frames.
Let’s call these kinds of particles the NR particles or Never at Rest condition particles.
Other particles like the electron always move with the speed v < c in all inertial reference frames; they have rest mass, and could be called particles.
According to the above definition, photon and graviton are NR particles, while electron and proton are particles.

Reconsidering relativistic Newton's second law
In this section the relativistic Newton's second law will be discussed. Before anything else, it should be noted that mass and energy are not equal, but as E = mc2shows, mass and energy are equivalent and also it defines matter as condensed energy. It allows us to develop our understanding the relationship between mass and energy and generalize light velocity from energy into mass.

Sub Quantum Energy
According to the principles of modern physics, Sub quantum energy (SQE) is preferred and defined in a way that it could be generalized and by using it, quantum and relativistic phenomena could be explained [8].
Definition: Sub quantum energy is the least electromagnetic energy that is defined as below:

SQE = ℎvleast, vleast < v, 6 E = ℎv, wℎere E = ℎv is detectable	(1) Relation (1) shows SQE in terms of energy. Every other photon consists of some SQE, so that;

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

E = nSQE, wℎere n is a nattural number	(2)
E = nSQE = nmSQEc2 = n(mSQEc)c = npSQEc → E = npSQEc	(3) For two photons with energies E1 and E2 we have:
E2 = ℎv2 = n2SQE, E1 = ℎv1 = n1SQE, E2 > E1 → n2 > n1 , n ∝ v	(4)
There n1and n2 are natural numbers.
With increasing a photon’s energy, its frequency also increases. Thus there should be a logical explanation
between energy increase and frequency increase. Therefore, based on SQE definition and relation (4) we can relate the relation between photon’s energy and frequency and the interaction between SQEs in a photon’s structure, i.e. with increasing the number of SQEs in photon, the interactions between SQEs in photon will increase and the frequency that originates from the interactions between SQEs will increase too.
Note: Although n ∝ v, this proportion does not necessarily represent an equation, but simply represents the physical fact that frequency has direct relation with the number and interactions of SQEs in a photon. Besides the relation between SQEs and v, could conclude that the linear speed of SQE in a vacuum relative to the inertial frames of reference, is actually the speed of light c. Since SQE in the photon’s structure has a linear speed equal to c and also it has nonlinear motions, the real speed of SQE is when all SQE nonlinear motions turn into linear motion and it only takes linear motion. In other words the limit speed of SQE is VSQE which is faster than light speed c, i.e. |VSQE | > |c|.
It is considerable that in special relativity the light speed is constant, and in general relativity besides
increasing of photon frequency while falling in a gravitational field, its speed also increases [9]; that we could take it as a proof of |VSQE | > |c|.
Sub Quantum Energy Principle
One SQE is a very small energy with NR mass mSQE that moves at |VSQE | > |c| relative to inertial reference frame and in every interaction between SQEs with other particles or fields the speed value of SQE remains constant; as in every physical condition we have;


AVSQE = 0 , in all inertial reference frames and any space	(5)

SQE principle shows that in every condition the speed value of SQE remains constant and only the linear speed of SQE converts to nonlinear speed and vice versa. Considering the definition of SQE, every photon consists of some SQE, if we ignore the zero rest mass of photon, much better and more real, physical phenomena may be investigated. Thus, a photon with energy E has mass m = E/c2 and a linear momentum p = mc. In other words, a photon is a part of matter and has nonzero mass before creation that after converting to photon carries the same mass that had in the matter and after absorption by a particle (e.g. an electron) the mass of photon is added to the mass of the particle.



Newton's second law and Sub Quantum Energy
Newton’s second law in classical mechanics which the mass was given as constant value and it was defined as follows;


F = dP = m dv
(6)

dt	dt
By considering relativity and the speed limit of light, in order to propose the speed limit, the relation (6) was modified. Thus the relativistic mass and the interaction between force and mass were presented as follows:


F = dp = d(mv) = v dm + m dv
(7)

dt	dt	dt	dt

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

According to the definition of the photon and SQE, Newton's second law could be reconsidered. By assuming an electron at moment t1, with the mass m and the speed v1 along an axis in the field (on an inertial frame in the gravitational or electrical field), under the force F and at the moment t2, so its speed becomes v. Electron takes energy dE in the interval dt = t2 − t1. According to relation (3) we have: At the moment t1;
p = mv1
Within the time dt = t2 − t1, the electron gains energy as dE. At this time the momentum electron changes to the following value:


At the moment t2 one could write:



Because of;
dE = npSQEc = nmSQEc2

mv1 + nmSQEc = (m + nmSQE)v mv1 + nmSQEc
v =	< c
m + nmSQE
v1 < c

v = mv1+nmSQEc < mc+nmSQEc = c	(8)
m+nmSQE	m+nmSQE
As v1 < c, so always v < c. Here one could correlate increased mass to the gain of energy in Newton's second law, i.e, so;

dm	nmSQE	1 dE
dt =	dt	= c2 dt


And Newton's second law could be rewritten as below:

F = ± v dE + m dv


(9)

c2 dt	dt
The ± sign in relation (9) has been marked on the increasing and decreasing state of energy (collinear or non-collinear directional variations in force and speed). The relativistic mass uses in high energies just for showing the speed limit in quantum equations while for well-known subatomic particles always v < c , in this order, only the given energy by particles must be considered and there no need to use the relativistic mass relation. We can better understand and explain the physical phenomena by using Newton’s second law as a relation (9). Through such a view of physical and astrophysical phenomena, the explanation of the universe would be more real. According to the Sub Quantum Energy Principle the speed value of all subatomic particles would be always constant and external force could only convert the SQE’s linear motions to nonlinear motions and vice versa. The speed of the created particles is a function of the internal interaction and the mechanism of creation of subatomic particles, and the external forces that are exerted on them. Thus light speed is constant in vacuum but it changes in medium and as soon as it enters vacuum it travels at former constant speed.
Moreover, concerning the speed of other subatomic particles, the reason behind the speed is a function of the internal interaction of the particles and the interaction among the SQEs within the structure of those particles.

Reviewing Dirac's equation by SQE and virtual photon
The equation relating to energy-mass and momentum in special relativity is:

E2 = p2c2 + m2c4	(10)

In the special case of a particle at rest (i.e. p=0), the above equation is reduced to E2 = m2c4, therefore, the correct equation to use to relate energy and mass in the Hamiltonian of the Dirac equation is [10];

E = ±mc2 → E+ = +mc2 , E_ = −mc2	(11)

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

Here the negative solution was used to predict the existence of antimatter. A high-energy photon γ with 10.2 MeV energy loses its entire energy when it collides with nucleus. Then, it makes a pair of electron e– and positron e+;

γ → e– + e+	(12) According to the relations (2) and (12) we can write;
γ = nSQE = 2kSQE → e– + e+, n = 2k kSQE → e– , kSQE → e+	(13)

In relation (13), there are two ks numerically equal, but the pair production process shows there two kSQE are not physically identical, because a kSQE converts to e– and another to e+. Maybe we simply pass this issue, but with careful study of the properties of SQEs in the photon structure we can get some interesting results. We chosen k+ , k– for the SQEs constituent, e+ , e– relation (13) is given by;



k–SQE → e– , k+SQE → e+	(14)
In pair annihilation, e+ and e– combine with each other and annihilate. So;

e+ + e– → k+SQE + k–SQE = 2γ	(15)
Consider to definition of Sub quantum energy (relation 2), a photon is a quantum of energy, but a SQE is a sub quantum of energy. Relations (14) and shows a photon converts into two kinds of SQEs and vice versa. So, an electron is formed of k–SQE and a positron is formed of k+SQE. We will show the minimum of k–SQE by
⊲ and the minimum of k+SQE by d , so that;
k–SQE = k ⊲	(16)
k+SQE = k d	(17)
Therefore, generally a real photon is given by;

k ⊲ +k d= γ	(18)
A photon has no charge and it carries electric and magnetic fields. These properties will be acceptable only when two opposite charged sub energies form a photon.

Virtual photon
Let's consider a photon with energy E = ℎv which falls from the position r + ∆r to the position r with energy ℎ' = ℎv' in the earth gravitational field (same as The Pound- Rebka experiment [11]), so according relation (18) we can write;

E = ℎv = k ⊲ +k d	(19)
E' = ℎv' = k' ⊲ +k' d	(20)
a = k' − k → ∆E = a(d +⊲)	(21)

There, a is a natural number, and a = 1 is defined the minimum unit of electromagnetic energy (the longest wavelength detection). So;
Emin = d +⊲	(22) In generaly, a photon is formed of a number of Emin , so we can write;
Ephoton = aEmin = a d +a ⊲	, where a natural number	(23)

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

While the classical, wavelike behavior of light interference and diffraction has been easily observed in undergraduate laboratories for many years, explicit observation of the quantum nature of light i.e., photons is much more difficult. For example, while well-known phenomena such as the photoelectric effect and Compton scattering strongly suggest the existence of photons, they are not definitive proof of their existence [12]. The photon is a complicated object to describe. When it is very virtual, it can be considered as devoid of any internal structure, at least to first approximation [13].
However, in quantum electrodynamics (QED) a charged particle emits exchange force particles continuously. This process has no effect on the properties of a charged particle such as its mass and charge. How is it explainable? If a charged particle as a generator has an output known as a virtual photon, what will be its input? In theoretically a pure steady state spin current without charge current can induce an electric field [14]. If a charged particle as a generator has an output known as a virtual photon, what will be its input?
Look at the charged particle. A charged particle is in the center of a spherical space and contains a number SQEs. This rotational sphere-like (charged particle spinning) is in a look into gravitons. The charged particle interacts on gravitons around it, compress them and converts to virtual photon. Also, magnetic field around the charged particle repels the virtual photon. In general, a charged particle is a generator that its input is gravitons and its output is virtual exchange particles that form the electric field. When a virtual photon from the negative charged particle reaches to around the positive charged particle, it combines with opposite virtual photon and they form a quantum energy. [15, 16, and 17] So, we can write:

a d= γ+
	(24)
	
	
	a ⊲= γ–
	(25)
	
	
	a d +a ⊲= γ+ + γ– = γ
	
	(26)
	
	This quantum energy is transferred to the positive charged particle, and positive charged particle accelerates toward the negative charged particle. Same process happens for negative charge particle.

Zero point energy (ZPE)
This attitude can explain zero-point energy [18, 19]. Under the terms of SQE, any space that has the gravitational effects can produce electromagnetic energy, and here the photon or a charged particle in the conversion of gravitons into γ–, γ+ and electromagnetic energy acts only as a catalyzes. When intensity of gravitational field increases or interfere gravitational fields of two massive bodies that are moving adjacent each other, gravity produces the electromagnetic energy.
The energy produced in space is a function of the graviton's density changes in the space. If we suppose the variation in graviton's density in the sample space is ρ6G , then integral on the volume V of space, will be equal to the electromagnetic energy that is given by;


E = lV ρ6Gdxdydz
(27)

If we analyze the three relations (’ ) and (26) carefully, the relationship between the emergence of pair electron-positron (generally fermions and bosons) and speed reduction can be understandable. In high energy physics one of the key parameters is speed, because accelerate particles can reach the conditions of before spontaneous symmetry breaking conditions [20]. Also for understanding and giving the super symmetric [21], we should study photon structure and mechanism of virtual photon production.


Beyond the Friedmann Equation
The Einstein universe is one of Friedmann's solutions to Einstein's field equation for dust with density ρ, cosmological constant ɅE , and radius of curvature RE . It is the only non-trivial static solution to Friedmann's equations. The key idea is that the universe is expanding. Consequently, the universe was denser and hotter in the past. Also the big bang cannot be described using any known equations of physics until 10-6 seconds had
elapsed. In this section we are using the sub quantum energy form of Friedmann equation, the inflationary Big Bang theory is reviewed.
A static universe, is a cosmological model in which the universe is both spatially infinite and temporally infinite, and space is neither expanding nor contracting. Such a universe does not have spatial curvature; that is

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

to say that it is 'flat'. A static infinite universe was first proposed by Giordano Bruno [22]. In contrast to this model, Albert Einstein proposed a temporally infinite but spatially finite model as his preferred cosmology in 1917, in his paper cosmological considerations in the General Theory of Relativity. Einstein wrote in his 1931 paper [23]; “In my original investigation, we proceeded from the following assumptions:
All locations in the universe are equivalent; in particular the locally averaged density of stellar matter should therefore be the same everywhere.
Spatial structure and density should be constant over time.” The Einstein cosmological equation may be written in the form:

R	1	8πG
μv − 2 gμvR + gμvɅ = c4 Tμv	(28)
Where Rμv is the Ricci curvature tensor,  R is the scalar curvature, gμv is the metric tensor, Ʌ is the cosmological constant, G is Newton's gravitational constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum, and Tμv is the stress–energy tensor.
Einstein's static universe is closed and contains uniform dust and a positive cosmological constant with value precisely ɅE = 4πGρ/c2, where ρ is the energy density of the matter in the universe and c is the speed of light. The radius of curvature of space of the Einstein universe is equal to:


R  =	c
√4πGρ
(29)


Now let’s review the Friedmann equations which is in the heart of the standard model of cosmology. We will deal with the original equation;


(H2
− 8 πGρ) R2
3
= −kc2
(30)




1 dR
Where H = (/)
R dt
is Hubble "constant", G is the gravitational constant , ρ is the universe mass density , c

the speed of light and the parameter k is 0 , +1 or -1 . One can write ρ = ρ0(R0/R)3, where ρ0 and R0 are the present day values of the density and radius of the universe.
In special relativity the speed of light in a vacuum is the same for all observers, regardless of the motion of the light source. But in the presence of gravity the speed of light becomes relative. Contrary to special relativity, the measured speed of light in a gravitational field is not constant, but these variations depend upon the reference frame of the observer; what one observer sees as true another observer sees as false. However, the speed of light in general relativity is not constant [9], and relation (31) is propounded for real space.
In addition, in quantum field theory, the vacuum state is the quantum state with the lowest possible energy. The uncertainty principle requires every physical system to have a zero-point energy greater than the minimum of its classical potential well. Also under the terms of SQE (sub quantum energy), any space that has the gravitational effects can produce electromagnetic energy. Look at the principle of sub quantum energy, and this fact that |VSQE | > |c|, it means;
(vSQE)x + (vSQE)y + (vSQE)z = VSQE = constant	(32)

In the inertial system we show vSQE as the total transmission speeds rate and SSQE the total non-transmission speeds rate of a SQE, so will always have;

vSQE + SSQE = VSQE	(33)


Thus, according to the direction of external force which was affected on a particle/object, the total non-transmission speeds rate is converted to the transmission speeds or to the inverse. Now we can define an absolute black hole. But before explanations, it is necessary to describe a few terms;

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

Sub quantum Divergence: if a particle/object falls in the gravitational toward a massive body, and the linear speed of its SQEs will be VSQE , we say that the object has sub quantum divergence. There is vSQE = VSQE in the sub quantum divergence. So;

Sub − quantum Divergence; SSQE = 0 → vSQE = VSQE	(34)

Sub quantum Convergence: if total transmission speeds SQEs of a particle/object go to zero, vSQE → 0 , we say that the object has sub quantum convergence. There is SSQE → VSQE in the sub quantum convergence. So;
Sub − quantum Convergence; vSQE → 0, tℎen SSQE → VSQE	(35)

Definition of an absolute black hole: If a particle/object falls down into the absolute black hole, it will be involved in sub quantum divergence before reaching the surface of the absolute black hole.
Consider the absolute black hole swallowing more matter; its mass and thus its gravitational field intensity will be increase. By increasing the mass, volume is reducing, its constituent SQEs are condensed and its transitional space will be limited.
Definition of Singularity: An absolute black hole with very high density under two followed conditions reaches the singularity state [24]:
Its constituent SQEs reach sub quantum convergence state i.e. SSQE → VSQE . So the linear speed of everything on the surface of absolute black hole goes to zero, vSQE → 0
Due to the gravitational pressure, the average distance between SQEs of an absolute black hole goes to zero.
Once the speed of SQEs reach SSQE → VSQE , the average distance goes to zero due to intensive collision.
They are scattered around and these chain scattering are spread everywhere inside the absolute black hole and therefore the singularity is occurred. The density is very high in the singularity state, but not infinite. In addition, the volume does not reach to zero, but the average the distance between SQEs reach to zero. Given above descriptions can easily explain counteracting Newton's second law and gravity [16].
Given the above themes, there are three basic limitations: transmission speed, non-transmission speed and density that they are the reason of creation the observable universe and all physical phenomena existing in it.
Now, by using the relations (34) and (35), the Friedmann equation and then the Big Bang will be reviewed.
So, the limit of linear speed in the universe is:


vSQE = VSQE	(36)
And the Friedmann equation (relation 31) can be written as follows [16]:


[(1 dR)
R dt
− / πGρ] R2
3
= −kv2
(37)


But there is vSQE = 0 and SSQE = VSQE on the surface of absolute black hole at the moment of Big Bang [16]. So;


[(1 dR)
R dt
− 8 πGρ] R2
3
= 0	(38)

R2 G 0 → (
1 dR 2
)
8
− / πGρ = 0 → (
1 dR 2
)
8
= / πGρ

R dt	3		 R dt	3
1 dR	8
/ = ±√/πGρ
R dt	3
Let’s ignore the minus part, so we can write:

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

dR = √8 πGρ dt
R	3
L R = √8 πGρ t + C ,	C is integer constant
n	3

R = e
√8πGρ t+C
3
= eCe
√8πGρ t
3
(39)

For t = 0, it gives the initial universe radius R0, R0 = eC, So;

R = R0e
√8πGρ t
3
(40)

Equation (40) is an exponential function that shows the rapid expansion of the universe in the early moments of Big Bang. According to the Big Bang, because Newton’s second law counteracts gravity, the physical laws malfunction for moments, and after passing some time the physical laws will return to their normal conditions so the gravitons, also SQEs combine with each other and produce other particles, then Friedmann equation will be valid as follows:

[(1 dR)
R dt
− / πGρ] R2
3
= −kv2
(41)


It is considerable that |v| depends to external forces that act on SQEs, so that |v| might be greater or smaller than light speed c. This view might also be a step closer to solving a major riddle in modern physics.

4 Conclusion
Classical mechanics and relativity (special and general) describe the acceleration is an explanation of outward of phenomena regardless the properties of sub quantum scales. It should be noted that the interaction between large objects (e.g. collision of two bodies) under the action of the quantum layer (in fact sub quantum layer) done. In sub quantum level, the amount of speed is constant, in any condition and any space, and in any interaction linear momentum changes to nonlinear momentum and vice versa. According to SQE, we are able to show there is not a zero volume with infinite density in singularity also before the Big Bang. So, regardless to reconsidering the relativistic Newton's second law, how can we resolve the dark energy problem?

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to Ms. Matin Vaez Tehrani



References:
Kane, G, “Tthe dawn of physics beyond the standard model”, Scientific American, vol 288(6), p.68-75, 2003
NEWING, R. A., “Uncertainty Principle and the Zero-Point Energy of the Harmonic Oscillator”,
Nature 136, 395-395 (07 September 1935
Tameshtit, Allan, “Zero-point energies, the uncertainty principle and positivity of the quantum Brownian density operator”, Phys. Rev. E 85, 042103 (2012)
Hawking S. W. “Chronology protection conjecture” Phys. Rev. D 46, 603, 1992
Senovilla, J., "Singularity Theorems in General Relativity: Achievements and Open Questions", arXiv: hist-ph/0605007, 2006
Kobayashi, T., Maeda, K.,"Can higher curvature corrections cure the singularity problem in f(R) gravity?", arXiv: 0810.5664v2 [astro-ph], 2009

Beyond the Modern Physics and Cosmological Equations

Daniel Remy Elec. Eng., Physicist, MBA, Principal Physicist at ALPHA-OMEGA PHYSICS RESEARCH
Javadi, H., et. al., “Discoveries and the necessity of Reconsidering the Perspectives on Newton's Second Law”, Journal of Nuclear and Particle Physics, vol. 2(3), p.31-35, 2012
To see the steps how Einstein theorized that the measured speed of light in a gravitational field is actually not a constant but rather a variable depending upon the reference frame of the observer: Einstein wrote this paper in 1911 in German: http://www.physik.uni-augsburg.de/annalen/history/einstein-papers/1911_35_898-908.pdf
Mayeul, A., "Dirac equation from the Hamiltonian and the case with a gravitational field", arXiv: 0512046v2, gr-qc, 2006
Pound, R. V.; Rebka Jr. G. A. "Apparent weight of photons". Physical Review Letters 4 (7), 1960
Thorn, J. J. et. al, "Observing the quantum behavior of light in an undergraduate laboratory", Am. J. Phys. 72 (9), 2004
Friberg, C. et.al “Jet Production by Virtual Photons”, arXiv: 9907245v1, hep-ph, 1999
Sun Qing-feng, et.al. "Spin-current-induced electric field", Phys. Rev. B 69, 054409, 2004
Javadi, H. et. al, "Sub quantum space and interactions properties from photon structure to fermions and bosons" Scientific Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences, Vol 2, No 5 (2013)
Javadi, H., “Reconsidering relativistic Newton's second law and its results” General Science Journal, 2014 [online available] http://gsjournal.net/Science-Journals/Essays/View/5518
Javadi, H., “A New Definition of Graviton” General Science Journal, 2009, [online available] http://gsjournal.net/Science-Journals/Essays/View/951
Guang-jiong Ni, "Zero-point energy of vacuum fluctuation as a candidate for dark energy versus a new conjecture of antigravity based on the modified Einstein field equation in general relativity", arXiv: 0506017v1, physics.gen-ph, 2005
Setterfield, B. "Reviewing the Zero Point Energy", Journal of Vectorial Relativity", JVR, 2010, pp.1-28
Brauner T., "Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking and Nambu–Goldstone Bosons in Quantum Many-Body Systems", arXiv: 1001.5212v2, hep-th, 2010
Trigiante M., "Fake super symmetry versus Hamilton–Jacobi", arXiv: 1203.3194v2, hep-th, 2012
“The universe is then one, infinite, immobile	It is not capable of comprehension and therefore is
endless and limitless, and to that extent infinite and indeterminable, and consequently immobile”. Giordano Bruno, Teofilo, in Cause, Principle, and Unity, "Fifth Dialogue," (1588), ed. and trans. by Jack Lindsay (1962)
O’Raifeartaigh C. and McCann B.” Einstein’s cosmic model of 1931 revisited: an analysis and translation of a forgotten model of the universe”, arXiv: 1312.2192v2 [physics.hist-ph], 2014
Javadi, H., et. al., “Definition of Singularity due to Newton's Second Law Counteracting Gravity”, Scientific Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences, Vol 2, No 3 (2013), pp. 116-124

1


Could Dense Quark Matter be a Source of Super High Energy Cosmic Rays?
Mais Suleymanov
COMSATS Institute of Information Technology , Islamabad, Pakistan

We propose that the dense quark matter could be a source of the high-energy secondary hadrons. These particles can be created from hadronization of the parton(s), which possess the energy of grouped partons from coherent interactions as a result of their collective behav-ior in high dense medium. The medium might be formed in the centre of some massive stars, and it could be a source of the super high-energy cosmic rays. In this work we consider some experimental results as an evidence on collective phenomenon, that can lead to coherent interactions in high dense medium and production of the high-energy secondary hadrons.

§1.	Introduction
Cosmic rays can provide us an important information on appearance and evolu-tion of the Universe. Since super high energy particle beams (greater than 1017−18 eV ) are not available in ground-based laboratories, super high energy cosmic rays are the only resource to study interactions of the particles in this energy domain. The source of super high energy cosmic are still unknown.1) The electromagnetic fields gener-ated by some massive stars are considered as plausible sources for the super high energy cosmic rays2) , however, some theoretical predictions show that these fields could be too weak to accelerate particles to energies of order 1015 eV . In conclusion, we see that it is necessary to look for a new source mechanism of super high energy cosmic rays, that doesn’t involve acceleration.
§2.	Conditions
The dense quark matter can be a source of the super high energy particles under following 3 conditions satisfied simultaneously:
Dense and/or hot quark matter with density ρ >> ρ0, and/or with tempera-ture T >> T0 ( ρ0 and T0 are the values of the density and the temperature of the normal nuclear matter);
Collective behavior of partons in the medium and formation of coherent parton group;
Coherent interaction in the system.
In these conditions the maximum energy of the produced partons are limited only by the values of the total energy of the system, where the values of energy will depend on the parameters of the system.





typeset using PTPTEX.cls ⟨Ver.0.9⟩

2

§3.	What did we have until now?
First Condition - Dense and/or Hot Quark Matter
It is widely discussed that the dense and/or hot quark matter can be formed in the center of some massive stars , for example as a result of supernova explosion, and could lead to the neutron stars formation.3)
Second Condition - Collective Behaviour
JINR Cumulative Effect
At relativistic energies we had the first signal on collective behavior - JINR Cu-mulative effect. It lead to the notion of production of particles with energies beyond the kinematic limit of free nucleon collisions.4) The effect was deeply discussed in the paper5) and below you can see some ideas from it. Few interesting points:
observation of the pions with energies ⋍ 8 GeV in D +A reactions at 5 A GeV ;
in the B + A → C + X reactions the particles C were produced with x > 1.

The values of the x can be defined as x = u
⋍ (ε−pcosθ)
m
, here u and s are the

Mandelstam invariants, m, ε, p and θ are the mass of nucleon, the total energies,
the 3 momentum and the emission angle for the C particles respectively, in the lab frame. For free nucleon collisions the values of x must be limited by 1. But as we can see from Fig.16) for hadron-nuclear interactions at JINR energies particles were emitted with x > 1.

Fig. 1.	Fig. 2.

The JINR cumulative effect has very peculiar properties, some of them are listed below:
It has been observed for photon-nuclear; lepton-nuclear; hadron-nuclear and nuclear-nuclear interactions.
The strong A-dependences were indicated for the invariant inclusive cross
sections of the cumulative particles( f (p) = εdσ )
The inverse of the slope for εdσ behavior as a function of x has a universal
value < x >⋍ 0.16
The theoretical interpretation of the effect proposed that it is a result of nucleon
collective phenomena and the cumulative particles could be produced from the sys-tem of collected nucleons- coherent groups of nucleons. The latter could be formed as a result of fluctuations of nuclear density 7) , the interaction of the projectile with target nucleons , and nucleon percolation.8) So we can say that JINR cumula-tive effect can be considered as a phenomenon with nucleons collective behavior and

3

coherent interactions.
CERN EMC Effect
European Muon Collaboration (EMC) investigated the muon deep inelastic scattering on iron and deuterium.9) They found the big disagreement between ex-perimental result and theoretical expectations. The experimental result shown that the F2 and hence the quark and gluon distributions of a nucleon bound in a nucleus differ from those of a free nucleon. None of the popular models suggested to explain the EMC effect seem satisfactory and present a new point of view on the effect as a simple relativistic phenomenon.10) The effect can also be considered as a result of nucleon collective phenomena.
Azimuthal Anisotropy at RHIC and LHC
Azimuthal anisotropy observed experimentally at RHIC and LHC shows a
collective behavior, which is likely to be formed at an early, parton, stage of the space-time evolution of the produced hot and dense matter11)–.13) The anisotropy
indicates that matter under extreme conditions behaves as a nearly ideal liquid rather than an ideal gas of quarks and gluons. Scaling behavior of v2 vs pT 12)–13) gives a
possibility to assume that the collective behavior of the partons defines the dynamics of the expansion in the longitudinal plane namely (see Fig.2)
The first measurement of elliptic flow of charged particles in Pb Pb collisions at the center of mass energy per nucleon pair √sNN = 2.76 A GeV 14) , with the
ALICE detector, demonstrated that the v2(pt) does not change within uncertainties from the √sNN = 200GeV to 2.76 TeV . ALICE LHC data demonstrated that
values of the v2 increase with energy.
Third Condition - Coherent Interactions
We have not had any experimental signal on coherent parton interactions. But we had the Coherent ”Tube” Model (CTM )15)–,17) which can give us even a clearer
explanation for the energetic (cumulative) particle production. Here the interaction of a hadron with a target nucleus results from its simultaneous collision with the tube of nucleons of cross section σ that lie along its path to the target nucleus. For the interaction of projectile with momentum plab the cumulative square of the center-of-
mass energy is si ⋍ 2implab (i is a number of nucleons , m - a nucleon mass). The paper16) quantitatively described unusually strong A dependence (stronger than the
commonly assumed A or A2/3) of the cross section for p + A → J/Ψ + X reaction at incident energies below 30 GeV , using cumulative effects (via energy rescaling). Ref.17) discusses the CTM for high energy nucleus-nucleus collisions. In this case two tubes are considered: i1 nucleons in incident tube and i2 nucleons in the target
tube. The c.m. energy squared for this tube-tube collision is approximately given by si1 i2 ⋍ 2i1i2mplab.
§4.	Physical Picture
So we could say that:
In the high density (and/or high temperature) nuclear matter the collective

4

behaviour of partons could lead to formation of the coherent groups of partons.
As a result of the coherent interactions the parton(s) could be produced with limited large values of x → 1 and hardonize to super high-energy particle(s), since in this case the resulting energy will also depend on the parameters of the system, so the energy of energetic particle can only be limited by values of the total energy of the system.
The coherent interactions and formation of the super high energy parton(s) can change the x distribution of the partons.
A medium with high density (and/ or high temperature) close to the QCD critical one could be a source of cosmic particles with super high energies, and could be created in the center of some massive star. The parton(s) with large values of x or energy can be formed in this system as a result of collective phenomenon and coherent interactions, hadronize and appear as super high-energy cosmic particles. Their energies can only be limited by the values of total energy of the grouped partons.
This physical picture assumes the existence of two strong correlations in the hot and dense matter: between the partons with limited small values of x → 0 ; between partons with limited large values of x  1 and limited small values of x  0. It means in hot and dense matter the x distribution of partons can vary and can get the structure with two additional maxima at x → 1 and x → 0.
The observation of super high energy particles could be a signal on the hot and dense states of strongly interacting matter , as well as on the Quark Gluon Plasma formation.
References
V.L. Ginzburg, Phys. Usp. 36,7 (1993) 587.
K.V. Ptitsina and S.V. Troitsky, Phys. Usp. 187, 7 (2010) 587.
A. G. Lyne and F. G. Smith,Pulsar Astronomy (Cambridge University Press, 1990).
A.M. Baldin et al., Sov.J.Nucl.Phys. 18, (1973) 41; Journal of PEPAN, 8 ,(1977)429
A.V. Efremov, PEPAN, 13, (1982) 613
V.S. Stavinski, Journal of PEPAN, 10 (1979) 949
D.I. Blokhintsev, JETP 32 (1957) 1295
H. Satz, hep-ph/0212046; Janusz Brzychczyk, nucl-th/0407008; C. Pajares, hep-ph/0501125
J.J. Aubert et al.,Phys. Lett. 123B, (1983) 275
A. V. Efremov, Phys. Lett. 174B, (1986) 219
V. A. Okorokov, Physics of Atomic Nuclei, 72, 1 (2009) 147
J. Adamset al., Phys.Rev.Lett. 95, (2005) 122301
A. Adareet al., Phys.Rev.Lett. 98, (2007)162301
K. Aamodt et al., arXiv:1011.3914
G. Berlad, A. Dar and G. Eilam, Phys. Rev. D 13 (1976)161 ; S. Frederiksson, Nucl.Phys.B 111 (1976)167; L. Bergstrom,S. Frederiksson, Phys. Lett.B 68,(1977)177; Y. Afek et al., Techkibon Hifa preprint TECHNION-PH-7722,1978; Y. Afek, G. Berlad, G. Eilam and
A. Dar, Technion Report No. PH-76-12
Y. Afek, G Berlad , G. Eilam and A. Darf Phys. Rev.Lett. 37 (1976) 947
Y. Afek, G. Berlad, A. Dar and G. Eilam, Technion No.PH-76-87

/
Weaknesses in the Formation and Evolution Processes of Mainstream Gravity and Cos-mology Theories, and their Consequences
Thierry De Mees

e-mail: thierrydemees@telenet.be

In this paper, I draw the list of weaknesses of the mainstream gravity and cosmology theories. First, the special and general relativity theory are discussed, where the emphasis is on the physical meaning of length contraction, the time expansion and the time delay. Then, the hypothesis of dark matter inside disk galaxies is treated. Since my paper of 2004 [10], this hypothesis has fainted, and I explain the reasons of it. The hypotheses of dark energy, the expanding and the accelerating universe are historically edified upon the big bang hypothe-sis and I criticize it by using physical objections which lead to obvious alternatives. Also the weakness of the planetary system’s creation theory is physically analyzed. Finally, I explain the evolution process of the modern gravity and cosmology theories and the possible reasons and causes for the increasing alienation from rational thinking.

WEAKNESSES IN THE THEORIES
Einstein added another set of obvious consequences. Since light is a wave, its wave velocity c in the aether can be ex-

Special Relativity’s historical background
pressed as c 
wherein E is the energy density of the

and its weaknesses in a nutshell
The facts and the critics [4]
At the end of the 1800’s and the beginning of the 1900’s, it was common knowledge that the universe would lay in an uni-versal luminiferous aether. That aether had a certain universal velocity, independently from the Earth’s motion. Light travel at a certain velocity in that aether, and that velocity should be larger in some directions than others.
When Michelson and Morley tried to find the aether’s relative
medium and  its density. It was known since long time that E   c2 , or expressed in the more usual way (absolute values instead of densities): E  mc2 . Einstein assumed that the ve-locity of light was invariable in its medium. Since energy is vari-able with speed by adding kinetic energy, he found the obvious consequences that not only length contracted with the factor
, but consequently, mass and time had to increase

velocity to the Earth, they always found no result at all.
Lorentz, a leading professor, suggested that light would be
with the factor 1 v2
c2 1 .

contracted in the direction of its relative velocity, exactly the in-verse of the presumed value of the Michelson and Morley expe-riment. So, it was a inevitable trivial consequence that the expe-riment had to give a null result.
The Lorentz contraction was the answer to the following se-tup: to produce an experiment with an expected a priori result A , and since the result of the experiment was status quo (say, a result 1), to construct a theory 1 A so that the combination
Einstein concluded that he didn’t need the aether for his theory, which is of course an intellectual aberration, since every-thing of the reasoning is based upon the assumption of an uni-versal aether at a velocity v. This brought Einstein to add a second fundamental weakness in his theory.
A third weakness, caused by the physical consequence of the denial of aether is the relativistic definition of ‘the observer’, which has nothing to do with the interaction of light in an aether.
This means that there doesn’t exist any physical explanation of

A  1/ A  1
A 
er.)
i.e. the status quo result itself. (In the above, wherein v is the assumed velocity of the aeth-
the length contraction but only a metaphysical state of an observ-er.
The support for the special relativity theory is found in the correctness of the Doppler effect for light and in the invariance of

This is the first fundamental and critical weakness where the special relativity theory is based upon.
the factor
in the Maxwell Equations for electro-

Weaknesses in the Formation and Evolution Processes of Mainstream Gravity and Cosmology Theories, and their Consequences - 2011	T. De Mees


magnetism. In the next chapter however, it will appear that the general relativity theory alienates from this point of view.
The traverse Doppler effect, which is ruled by the inverse fac-
Post-Special Relativity Theories’ historical background and its weaknesses in a nutshell

tor 1 v2
c2 1
, shows that the special relativity theory for-
The facts and the critics [ 4 ] [ 3 ]
The Minkowski space-time is the expansion of special relativi-

got to consider the perpendicular effects of light. Indeed, the theory only considers a one-dimensional process. Einstein’s theory covers the Doppler effect of light in one direction, nothing more.
Another weakness , the fourth one, is the intrinsic assumption that time can only be measured through light, which on its turn is affected by distortions. It is not considered that other means would exist to deduce local time correctly, or that a pre-calculation can rectify the measurements. Einstein wanted the measured results to concord directly with the theoretical solu-tion, without much more considerations.
The fifth weakness of the theory is that the assumed proper-ties of light waves were plainly transferred to matter. The appar-ent concordance of the Doppler equations of light into a wide spectrum of applications was an amazing gambling windfall.
Finally, the sixth weakness is the assumption that the speed of light is a constant for every observer. Physically speaking, the speed of light is only measurable when a light wave hits the eye or a detector. But if the light speed could be measured from a distance, when the wave departs from one object and finally reaches a second object that moves at a different speed, it is ob-vious that the light speed can’t be identical during the whole path.
1.2 The alternatives
Let us see if there are alternatives. The Michelson and Morley experiment gave a status quo result. Strictly speaking, that means that the velocity of the aether is zero to the Earth and that no theory at all can be found through the experiment. There was an excellent reason to maintain the hypothesis of an aether, but an aether that was locally bound with masses. This track would have been a much more valid alternative.
Hence, it is clear that special relativity is, in a physical reality, nothing more but a part of the Doppler effect in a physical aether. So, there is no new theory to be found at this stage of the analysis. An utmost interesting theory was already found by Oliver Heaviside at the end of the 19th century, the transposition of the Maxwell equations of electromagnetism into gravity, wherein the Coulomb law became the Newton law and the Lo-rentz force an equivalent Lorentz force for gravitation, where the magnetic field was transposed into a ‘gyrotation’ field: the
transmission of motion (or rotation) by gravity into space.
Below, it will be clear that the only fact that Heaviside’s theory couldn’t yet explain the double bending of light and the full perihelion advance of Mercury was a fatal handicap at that time. Let us now look at the second mainstream theory, the Min-kowski space, which is fully based upon the failing special rela-tivity theory.
ty and was created in an attempt to generalize it in the three di-mensions of place and one dimension of time. This approach was only applicable for a space without gravity, where light follows straight paths.
The alternatives
Strictly speaking, when interpreting the Minkowski space-time as a Doppler effect, it could have been of some use, at the condition of include the transverse Doppler effect, perpendicu-larly on the light’s path, which is an inverse Doppler factor. It would then be clear as well that, by interpreting both Doppler effects, a length shortening of a wave in one direction would si-multaneously engender a length increase in the perpendicular direction, which agrees with the Heaviside theory (Gravitomag-netism) for elementary particles [4]. Moreover, the Heaviside theory makes a difference between ‘mass’ and ‘gravity field of a mass’. Where special relativity speaks of an infinite mass at ve-locity c , Heaviside’s theory will speak of an infinite gravity field in the perpendicular direction to motion but a zero gravity field in the direction of motion.
General Relativity’s historical background and its weaknesses in a nutshell
The facts and the critics [3]
General Relativity is based upon the idea that Gravity deflects not only light, but also any electromagnetic wave. Moreover, it is now assumed that the whole universe is made of these waves, including mass.
In the 1910’s, the bending of light was measured several times, and the remaining perihelion advance of Mercury still was unexplained.
There was a peer pressure of competition between several scientists of that time, Poincaré and Lorentz being the most im-portant ones. But instead of finding a theory that would have the bending of light and the perihelion advance of Mercury as appli-cations of the theory, Einstein, with the help of Marcel Grossman, fabricated an integrated gravity model with both solutions in-cluded and integrated.
I consider that the first weakness. The best theories should not include solutions within themselves, but explain phenomena by the theory’s applications. Einstein wanted the measurements being directly confirmed within the theory. Indeed, Einstein rea-lized later that this wasn’t possible. When, from an object, a light ray departs (known time and place) and it arrives at another ob-
ject (known time and place) after a gravitational bending, it is obvious that the speed of light isn’t experienced as c . The same
occurs when the two objects are relatively moving. Though very locally the speed may be always very close to c , the overall
speed isn’t.

Weaknesses in the Formation and Evolution Processes of Mainstream Gravity and Cosmology Theories, and their Consequences - 2011	T. De Mees


The true Gravitomagnetism (the Heaviside theory, and not the linearised GRT, see below in this paragraph) works the other way around: the theory provides the data in every point of space and the measurements have to be understood within that framework. Though this can be seen as a weakness, almost all the actual theories work that way. The theory can be confirmed by testing and measuring, while having the theory in mind.
A theory should be as simple as possible. It appears that this is not the case with the actual mainstream theory, which is only able to get general solutions but no detailed ones. That is the second weakness. Exact solutions such as the Schwarzschild and the Kerr metric are very rare, and moreover, revealing little.
The appropriation of the Equivalence Principle by Einstein is a third weakness because Einstein’s reasoning makes a turna-round. Moreover, he reasons in Newtonian gravity only which has nothing to do with the specificities of GRT.
himself much later, that inertia would depend from the rest of the universe and that inertia of a mass would be zero in the ab-sence of other masses. I proved [19] with a few considerations (see the next paragraph) that inertia is caused by the own created fields about the particle, which have an immense impact upon the surroundings (electromagnetism and gravity) but also upon itself, when a displacement causes a Doppler effect and so, a strong local field increase causing an counteracting response.
During the 20th century, several ‘improvements’ have been made on the theory and alternative theories have been used, as the post-Newtonian theory, the trendy MOND theory, the ‘linea-rised GRT’ and so on. These adaptations confirm the need of simpler solutions to the highly nonlinear general relativity theory.
The alternative

a  F1	mi

/
m
g





Fig.1
Here as well, the Heaviside theory or (true) Gravitomagnet-
ism is instead able to deduce, as simple applications :
The swiveling of orbits (of planets), about a spinning ob-ject (the sun), to its equatorial plane. The orbits become prograde [12].
The origin of Saturn’s tiny rings [16].

F
2
g
Indeed, if we compare


F  m a



and


F  m g



in one
The origin of the planetary system [17].
The light and mass horizons of black holes [14].
The prediction of torus-like black holes [12].
The prediction of non-exploding fast spinning stars [12].

single experiment, where both setups are connected with each-other, so that F  F , as in fig.1, we get m /m  g / a . This equation gives an infinite number of solutions. However, the single fact that Newton defined
g  G M	R2
(wherein we can write Mg  N mg , with N a real number) makes that G has been defined in relation to mg .
When eliminating g , one gets:
The full explanation of the explosion of hourglass super-novae [21].
The double deflection of light by gravity [22].
The prograde, equal velocity of stars in disk galaxies [23].
The full Mercury perihelion advance [13].
The general motions of asteroids [20].
The lifetime increase of fast moving unstable particles [24].
A gravitational repulsion mechanism [12].
A second theory, very close to the Heaviside theory is able to

2
G  a	g	a	g
2	R2
a
define the main components of gravitomagnetism, based upon the hypothesis that the forces between particles are caused by a

mi Mg	mi N mg	N mi
which denotes an equation with an inertial mass only! So, we can write
a  G M / R2 .
The form is exactly the same as the gravity form, but with two gravity components, G and R . Hence, mg  mi .
The Equivalence Principe was already implicitly included in Newton’s gravity and it was nothing more but a choice to reduce an infinite number of solutions into one single solution. This equivalence doesn’t mean that both physical processes, the iner-tial and the gravitational acceleration are identical. While gravity depends from the rest of the universe, inertia might be only due to itself.
So we come to the fourth weakness, which is the assumption of Mach’s Principle. It is very unlikely, and Einstein corrected
Coriolis effect between a spinning particle of trapped ‘light’, and some escaping ‘light’ from another particle [15]. The word ‘light’ stands for ‘electromagnetic waves’.
The effect applies to the sun, where there is an amazing link between its mass, radius and spin velocity: the ‘universal’ gravi-tational constant is the glue of that relationship [15].
Dark Matter’s historical background and its weaknesses in a nutshell
The facts and the critics
One of the mysteries of the cosmos is the discovery that in disk galaxies, the velocity of the stars of the disk is almost con-stant. The Milky way characteristics are shown in Fig. 2 (from Burton 1976 Ann. Rev. 14, 275, shown from the ADS).
The linear velocity of the stars is given by the curve  (R)
and is fairly constant from the distance of 1 kpc from the centre

Weaknesses in the Formation and Evolution Processes of Mainstream Gravity and Cosmology Theories, and their Consequences - 2011	T. De Mees

on. The curve  (R) represents the observed mass density. This curve is smooth and resemble a hyperbolic function.
Fig. 4. Schematic view of a spherical galaxy with a spin-ning  central  zone  with

mass M 0
and a division into

fictive spherical shells with each a mass M 0 . An orbiting star about the centre is shown.


Let us start from a spherical galaxy with a spinning centre, due to fast spinning stars and black holes. Let the fast spinning stars essentially be active in a central zone with a radius R0 . Let

the total radius of the galaxy be a multiple of
R0 . A schematic



In Fig. 3. some other velocities are shown of several other disc galaxies (from Rubin, Ford, and Thonnard 1978 ApJL 225, L107, reproduced courtesy of the AAS). In general, we can say that the velocity of the stars is fairly constant, beginning at a dis-tance of 2 kpc.
The centre of the bulge has no specific (average) velocity, which result in a zero velocity in the figure. The first part of the disk outside the bulge, at nearly 2,5 kpc has often got a some higher velocity. And over 4 kpc, the velocity is almost linear.
Since the stars’ orbits don’t follow the Kepler velocities, the Swiss, Fritz Zwicky wrongly assumed in 1934 that there would be a corrective invisible dark mass in and around the galaxies.
view of a spherical galaxy is given in fig.3. It has a spinning cen-tral zone with mass M0 . Let us divide it into fictive spherical
shells with each a mass M0 .
According to Kepler, a star’s orbit with a radius R obeys to
a velocity according the equation v2	 GM	R .	(1)
Due to that central rotation, all the stellar orbits get influ-enced. Through the gravitational transmission of angular mo-mentum, all the orbits will swivel down to a prograde disk. The original orbits’ radii are almost not affected by this process. This follows from Gravitomagnetism.
Let fig.5 be a schematic side view of the final disk galaxy hav-ing a central bulge with a radius R0 .



R
M0 M0 M0 M0



Fig. 5. Schematic view of a disk galaxy having a set of concentric circle-rings with a mass M 0 .
Since the swivelled orbits create a very dense disk, the divi-

sions into masses M 0
will have to be taken in account for the

calculus of the Kepler equation. In other words, the attraction at the radius R is not ruled by only M 0 , but by 3M 0 (in fig. 4).
The radius R can also be expressed as a multiple of R0 .
In general, it can be (roughly) said that :
G n M


Mainstream followed the idea as sheep. However, the correct
2
R,disk
 	0 
k R0
(2)

answer is simple and is given below.
The alternative
We have to consider some other facts before we go for an analysis of the stars' velocities in the disk galaxy: we need a re-construction of the original spherical galaxy where it came from. And we analyse the disk part of the disk galaxy as well.
with n and k the geometrical quasi-constant functions that
depend upon the mass distribution of the original spherical gal-axy. The right hand only consists of constants, whereof  n and
k are strongly covariant, which proves the principle of the con-stancy of the velocity of the stellar orbits in a disk galaxy.
Since the publication of my paper in 2004, there occurs a steadily fainting of the dark matter idea, but still there is a halo of secrecy within mainstream, allowing doubt on the issue.

Weaknesses in the Formation and Evolution Processes of Mainstream Gravity and Cosmology Theories, and their Consequences - 2011	T. De Mees


The Hubble constant and the expanding un-iverse, historical background and its weak-nesses in a nutshell
The facts and the critics [11]
Light from stars is red-shifted. The colors tend to the red side of the light spectrum. Edwin Hubble interpreted this as a Dopp-ler-shift, standing for a velocity. Since all the stars, pulsars and quasars are red-shifted, Hubble decided that the red-shift was the evidence for an expanding universe, since the Jesuit Georges Lemaître just had invented the idea of an expanding universe, becoming later the Big Bang theory.
Definition of the expanding universe.
H is the Hubble constant according to the Zwicky definition
z  exp H d /c 1 (herein z is the measured red-shift fac-tor, d the known distance of a star by its luminosity analysis and
c the speed of light). With well-known stars, one can find H
and with the known H , one can extrapolate the distance for other stars.
The time-dependent scale factor a , related to the Hubble
constant is defined by r  a t  x , where x is the static, non-
expanded length and r is the real radius of the universe due to expansion. The universe then expands with the scale factor a ,
I also described a way to define the real distance of stars by the light fatigue, which is frequency-dependent in the second power [25], while other red-shifts are linearly frequency-dependent (first power). However, it is unknown at what rate light fatigue occurs nor if sufficient precise tools exist to measure it.
The accelerating universe, historical back-ground and its weaknesses in a nutshell
The facts and the critics [7] [1] [2]
Since the universe has been observed with steadily more pre-cise telescopes, some deficiencies to the linearity of the Hubble constant have been remarked. For instance in 1998, observations of Type Ia supernovae suggested that the expansion of the un-iverse has been accelerating since around red-shift of z~0.5. Also, some quasars are supposed to lay close to galaxies, because they probably are jets, projected by the black hole inside the galaxy. However, the quasars’ red-shift is much higher. In some cases, five quasars in different stages of their development are seen together near a galaxy and their red-shifts follow a curiously sequence of values. By misinterpreting the Hubble constant as a scale factor, no better solution has been found then an accelerat-ing universe.
Meanwhile, the discovery of the Karlsson peaks might bring
some change in it.

and the Hubble constant is given by H  aɺ
a . This means that

the red-shift is supposed to be linear with an increasing distance, but the expansion velocity is supposed to be linear with an in-creasing distance as well. Since H has the inverse dimension of time, is supposed to represent the age of the universe, which is the distance that light has traveled since the origin of time.
One important weakness is the limitation of the red-shift is-sue to the idea of expansion, while it is clear that several other possible origins for red-shift exist.
The Big Bang concept is only one possibility among others, and the attribution of the whole red-shift to universe expansion is a hazardous gamble.
5.2 The alternatives
Several alternative origins of red-shift exist, such as the gravi-tational red-shift, and the most important, the energy losses oc-curred when hitting a hydrogen atom or molecule in space.
When quasars near galaxies are described with high to very high red-shifts, while the galaxies themselves show low red-shifts, it is clear that large amounts of hydrogen around these quasars cause it by absorbing and re-emitting light, resulting in successive energy losses. It has been described by Lyndon E Ashmore as a double Mössbauer effect, resulting in the equation H  2 ne h re /me , wherein H is the Hubble constant, h is




















Fig.6 : Distribution of x = log(1+z) for the quasars and other compact sources. The lower solid line and the broken line corresponds to the dis-tribution of objects with redshifts z measured at two different surveys, and the upper solid line corresponds to the total sample.
Karlsson found five equidistant peaks and the beginning of a sixth one. On the fig.6 we see multiple quasars with different redshifts that follow periodicities according Karlsson and that

the Plank constant,
re and me
the radius and mass of an elec-
show the location of our galaxy in the universe.

tron, and ne the number of electrons hit by the light between the source and the observer.
The alternatives [9] [18]
It is found that the Ashmore redshift, which is the loss of energy by light when hitting a hydrogen particle in space, com-

Weaknesses in the Formation and Evolution Processes of Mainstream Gravity and Cosmology Theories, and their Consequences - 2011	T. De Mees


bined with the circling light theory (which states that light circles the universe due to its large mass) are particularly useful to ex-plain the redshift of quasars and the quasar peaks' distribution. The end of the fifth circling of light about our universe means that the same quasars or galaxies can be seen up to five times, in different stages of their development. If follows that our universe has a center.
From where our galaxy is situated, we can see most of the universe's past because of the circling of light about the universe. The radius where our galaxy is situated, seen from the universe's centre, is five times smaller than the theoretical (mainstream) radius of our universe between its center and our galaxy.
The creation of the planets, historical back-ground and its weaknesses in a nutshell
The facts and the critics
In the 20th century, it was supposed that during the formation of our Milky Way a star grazed our sun and that some matter from both stars formed a hot cloud that became our planets.
Later, the protoplanetary disk (accretion disk) theory came up, that uses the nebular hypothesis for explaining the creation of the planets.
The first weakness is that a protoplanetary disk would consist of molecular hydrogen. It is totally unexplainable that such a cloud would form all the elements we know on Earth and else-where in the planetary system.
A second weakness is that there only exist one planet for each planet’s orbit, while the Trojan asteroids near Jupiter show us that such asteroids (if not: planets) should be found everywhere in the solar system.
The alternatives
The solar internal electromagnetic energy is gigantic. When simulating an electromagnetic eruption (or protuberance) be-tween sunspots, it appears that the mass of the erupted electrons from the sun coincide with the mass of the core planets, while the mass of the same amount of corresponding protons coincide with the mass of the gas planets. Moreover, when the ejection energy is associated with the solar inner temperature, the energies cor-respond. Finally, when calculating the electromagnetic repulsion between the four distinct electromagnetic loops that formed the four gas planets, a 99%probability can be found between such a formation hypothesis and the Titius-Bode sequence.
Hence, there is a very tangible evidence that the planets came out of the sun.
WEAKNESSES IN THE THEORIES’ EVOLU-TION PROCESSES
When looking at the gravity and cosmological theories, we see an important difference compared with other theories (medi-cines, biology, technology, etc). For ‘other’ theories:
Other theories’ evolution is made through new laborato-ry tests (or discoveries);
Other theories’ evolution is partly based on published papers and partly on inside information of companies;
Other theories’ extrapolation of facts can be tested by a trial and error scheme on the short and medium term;
With other theories, any valuable input from any source is accepted;
Other theories’ motivation is the commercialization of products and services;
Projects are funded by companies (stockholders);
Therefore, a high commitment is requested by a proven methodology;
Therefore, the budgets are in accord with the research and with the expected return;
Unproductive other theories are quickly rejected;
Therefore, the level of effective productivity and evolu-tionary progress is high.
Mainstream gravity and cosmology (M G&C) theories’ evolu-tion processes work differently.
M G&C theories’ evolution is made through reflection, observation and interpretation;
M G&C theories’ evolution is only based upon published papers;
M G&C theories’ extrapolation of facts can be tested by a theoretical and a practical trial and error scheme on the medium and long term;
With M G&C theories, no valuable input from non-mainstream source is accepted (journals’ renown, rejec-tion of papers);
M G&C theories’ motivation is based upon classes (uni-versities, journals’ renown), power and prestige;
Projects (universities, NASA, ESA, …) are funded by pol-iticians;
Therefore, a high commitment is requested between pres-tigious organizations or scientists and the politicians (lobbies). Faith in the constancy of intellectual values and reliability is requested;
The budgets are very high (CERN, NASA, …);
Unproductive M G&C theories’ from prestigious scien-tists are maintained and adapted very gradually and very slowly; new theories from non-prestigious scientists are neglected or refused by definition;
Therefore, the level of effective productivity and progress of the global community is minimal.
Mainstream gravity and cosmology theories’ evolution processes are dramatically ineffective because only the presti-gious scientists and organizations can take the initiative to modi-fy or to change it. The budgets are very high and the need for effectivity is low.
Even then, the caution of a pope is used for the change of theories and the timing is very slow. When non-mainstream scientists’ ideas have to be introduced, mainstream community try to find a turn-around (see the dark matter issue) in order to not commit plagiarism. Indeed, they refuse to refer to non-mainstream academicians’ or researchers’ papers. How many

Weaknesses in the Formation and Evolution Processes of Mainstream Gravity and Cosmology Theories, and their Consequences - 2011	T. De Mees


mainstream scientists calculate gravity problems by gravitomag-netism, and then try to prove it with general relativity, which hardly occurs successfully?
The slow evolution process of the gravity and cosmology theories can be regarded as an implicit benefit for the prestigious organizations and the politicians for the following reasons:
A large level of employment in universities and in pres-tigious organizations in physics and astronomy;
A long-lasting use of very expensive equipment such as super computers and structures that are constantly re-newed and updated (CERN, NASA, …);
A positive return of the prestigious aura to the politicians (J.F. Kennedy, Nixon, …).
Therefore, the hope for a faster theoretical progress is hypo-thecated in these domains. It is undeniable that thousands of students and scientists follow the mainstream like sheep, because by opposing other theories to the existing ones, they risk their factual exclusion.
The more there is a need for larger budgets, the more cau-tiously and thus slowly the progress is made. Numerous valua-ble contributions are neglected.
However, it has to be said that the practical information ser-vices, such as those from NASA/ESA, since the introduction of the Hubble telescope, have brought some important progress in the observation of many new areas of the universe, and have opened a new world to many young students.
And a very new development, the Internet, allows for all kinds of non-mainstream publications that are free or nearly free of charge and accessible to all. Especially larger ‘dissident’ web-sites are regularly hacked and denigrated by some opponents, which proves (in a sad way) the dissident’s growing success. The true gravitomagnetism of Heaviside has been hijacked by main-stream’s linearised GRT on Wikipedia. Probably the best exam-ple of the permanent sapping by mainstream.
Conclusion
The evolution processes of theories are restricted to two main directions: firstly, the renown and power of scientists, universi-ties and journals, and very little effort is done to broaden it downwards; secondly, the progress of physical confirmation or denial of the current theories by observation and testing.
For instance, although I showed fundamental weaknesses, even defects in GRT, and even if GRT is a clumsy theory, as long as the testing don’t prove GRT is wrong, the mainstream com-munity isn’t switching over to the (true) Gravitomagnetism. The same happened with ‘dark matter’, (which is nothing more than a not-understood effect of the (true) gravitomagnetism (or in GRT: the Kerr Metric), which I call gyrotation, the magnetic part of gravitomagnstism) where hundreds of scientists are searching after in the sky, but don’t even know what is it. Now, the fa-shionable ‘dark energy’, another phantasm for ‘the unknown’, but finally denoting aether and gyrotation forces in space is re-placing ‘dark matter’.
Agreed, who cares about the sky if humanity can’t even properly master the events on earth. But the actual mainstream gravity’s and cosmology’s processes seem to be nothing more but the continuation of political (and military) power and fame.
The hope for change lays in the Internet. It is very probable that the actual system will not remain tenable and that dissidents will enter the play, but not without defining their own rules: an open, effective interaction with large governmental and para-governmental organizations.
References
[ 1 ] Arp, H.: “Origins of Quasars and Galaxy Clusters”, arXiv:astro-ph/0105325v1, 2001.
[ 2 ] Arp, H., Fulton, C.: “A Cluster of High Redshift Quasars with Ap-parent Diameter 2.3 Degrees”, arXiv:0802.1587v1, 2008.
[ 3 ] Eddington, A.S.: (French translation) Espace, Temps et Gravita-tion), Librairie Scientifique J. Hermann, 1921.
[ 4 ] Einstein, A., , Über die spezielle und die allgemeine Relativitäts-theorie, 1916.
[ 5 ]  Jefimenko, O.: Gravitation and Cogravitation, 2006, Electret.
[ 6 ] Heaviside, O.: A Gravitational and Electromagnetic Analogy, The Electrician, 31, 281-282 and 359, 1893.
[ 7 ] Karlsson, K. G. : “On the existence of significant peaks in the quasar redshift distribution”, Astronomy and Astrophysics, vol. 58, no. 1-2, p. 237-240, June 1977.
[ 8 ] Feynman, Leighton, Sands, Feynman Lectures on Physics V.2., 1963.
[ 9 ] Lyndon Ashmore : “Recoil Interaction Between Photons and The Electrons In The Plasma Of Intergalactic Space Leading To The Hubble Constant And CMB”, March 2003. http://www.lyndonashmore.com/
[ 10 ] Negut, E., 1990, On intrinsic properties of relativistic motions. [ 11 ] Zwicky, F. 1929 Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 773 – 785.
[ 12 ] De Mees T., “Analytic Description of Cosmic Phenomena Using the Heaviside Field”, Physics Essays, Vol. 18, No. 3 (2005).
[ 13 ] De Mees T., “Mercury's Perihelion Advance is Caused by Our Milky Way”, General Science Journal (2007).
[ 14 ] De Mees T., “Mass- and light-horizons, black holes' radii, the Schwartzschild metric and the Kerr metric”, General Science Jour-nal (2006, upd. 2010).
[ 15 ] De Mees T., “Is the Differential Rotation of the Sun Caused by a Graviton Engine”, General Science Journal (2010).
[ 16 ] De Mees T., “Why does Saturn have many tiny rings ?”, General Science Journal (2004).
[ 17 ] De Mees T., “The Titius-Bode Law Shows a Modified Proto-Gas-Planets' Sequence”, General Science Journal (2010).
[ 18 ] De Mees T., “The Karlsson Peaks in the Quasar's Redshift Distribu-tion as an Indication for Circling Light in a non-expanding Un-iverse.
[ 19 ] De Mees T., “Motion is Relative to the Universe but Inertia is not”, General Science Journal (2011).
[ 20 ] De Mees T., “Cyclic Tilt Spin Vector Variations of Main Belt Astero-ids Due to the Solar Gyro-Gravitation”, General Science Journal (2008).

Weaknesses in the Formation and Evolution Processes of Mainstream Gravity and Cosmology Theories, and their Consequences - 2011	T. De Mees


[ 21 ] De Mees T., “On the geometry of rotary stars and black holes”, Gen-eral Science Journal (2005).
[ 22 ] De Mees T., “The Calculation of the Bending of Starlight Grazing the Sun”, General Science Journal (2010).
[ 23 ] De Mees T., “Deduction of Orbital Velocities in Disk Galaxies: Dark Matter a Myth?”, General Science Journal (2008).
[ 24 ] De Mees T., “On the Origin of the Lifetime Dilation of High Veloci-ty Mesons”, General Science Journal (2010).
[ 25 ] De Mees T., “Towards an Absolute Cosmic Distance Guage by using Redshift Spectra from Light Fatigue”, General Science Jour-nal (2009).

Baryon Asymmetry, Dark Matter and Quantum Chromodynamics
D.H. Oaknin and A. Zhitnitsky
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z1, CANADA
We propose a novel scenario to explain the observed cosmological asymmetry between matter and antimatter, based on nonperturbative QCD physics. This scenario relies on a mechanism of separation of quarks and antiquarks in two coexisting phases at the end of the cosmological QCD phase transition: ordinary hadrons (and antihadrons), along with massive lumps (and antilumps) of novel color superconducting phase. The latter would serve as the cosmological cold dark matter. In certain conditions the separation of charge is C and CP asymmetric and can leave a net excess of hadrons over antihadrons in the conventional phase, even if the visible universe is globally baryon symmetric B = 0. In this case an equal, but negative, overall baryon charge must be hidden in the lumps of novel phase. Due to the small volume occupied by these dense lumps/antilumps of color superconducting phase and the specific features of their interaction with “normal” matter in hadronic phase, this scenario does not contradict the current phenomenological constrains on presence of antimatter in the visible universe. Moreover, in this scenario the observed cosmological ratio ΩDM ∼ ΩB within an order of magnitude finds a natural explanation, as both contributions to Ω originated from the same physics during the QCD phase transition. The baryon to entropy ratio
−10	<
nB/nγ ∼ 10	would also be a natural outcome, fixed by the temperature Tf ∼ TQCD at which
the separation of phases is completed.

PACS numbers: 98.80.Cq, 95.30.Cq, 95.35.+d, 12.38.-t


INTRODUCTION

The origin of the cosmological asymmetry between baryons and antibaryons, and, more specifically, the origin of the observed baryon to entropy ratio nB/s 10−10 (nB being the net baryon number density in hadrons, and s the entropy density) remains a mystery and one of the main challenges for particle-cosmology. In order to explain this number from symmetric initial conditions in the very early Universe, it is generally assumed that three criteria, first laid down by Sakharov [1], must be satisfied at the instant when the asymmetry was generated:
C and CP are not exact symmetries.
Baryon number violating processes exist.
The processes take place out of thermal equilibrium.
In general, nevertheless, all three of these tight conditions can be loosened in certain scenarios. For example, C and/or CP asymmetries can be generated earlier and not necessarily at the same instant when the cosmological baryon asymmetry developed. Explicit baryon number violation is not strictly necessary; it has been shown that in certain contexts spontaneous violation is able to produce a spatial separation of baryonic charge which leaves a positive net number in our local patch of the universe. Neither out-of-equilibrium dynamics is a must: in some suggested scenarios baryogenesis develops due to spontaneous CPT breaking.
Here we argue that baryogenesis may be realized at the instant just after the cosmological QCD phase transition without explicit violation of baryon number, if at some stage in the earlier history large C and CP asymmetries have developed homogeneously over the whole visible universe. Motivated by the cosmological ratio between baryonic and dark matter densities, ΩDM  ΩB within an order of magnitude, which we interpret as an indication of a close relationship between the dark matter problem and the origin of the cosmological baryonic asymmetry [2], our proposal features an scenario of baryon charge separation in a universe with zero overall baryon charge B = 0. This scenario relies on the idea that baryon/antibaryon charge can be stored in dense lumps/antilumps of ordinary light quarks/antiquarks condensed in color superconducting (CS) phase, which would serve as cosmological cold dark matter. In different words, we suggest that the observed cosmological excess of hadrons over antihadrons may not necessarily be expressed as a net baryon charge B > 0 in the universe if an equal, but negative, overall charge is accumulated in the lumps/antilumps of dense color superconducting phase. In this sense, our proposal resembles an old scenario discussed in [3] of a baryon ”asymmetric” universe with zero overall baryon charge B = 0, in which the net excess of hadrons over antihadrons is compensated by a negative overall baryonic charge in an hypothetical new fundamental scalar field hidden in the dark sector. Our proposal does not rely on any new fundamental particle, but on a new phase of ordinary QCD matter.

2

This proposal follows the recent observation [4, 5, 6] that chunks of condensed ordinary quarks with large baryon charge accumulated in color superconducting phase may become at temperatures T < 0.57∆, where ∆ 100 MeV, absolutely stable objects against decay into ordinary nuclear matter. Color superconducting (CS) phase is a theoret-ically motivated novel phase of QCD matter that is realized when light quarks are squeezed to a density which is a few times the nuclear density and organize a single coherent state that condense in diquark channels, analogous to Cooper pairs of electrons in BCS theory of ordinary superconductors, see original papers [7] and recent reviews [8] on the subject. It has been known that CS phase may be realized in Nature in neutron stars interiors and in the violent events associated with collapse of massive stars or collisions of neutron stars, so it is important for astrophysics. We argue here that if such conditions occur in the early universe during the QCD phase transition, CS phase may be important for cosmology as well.
The possibility that massive lumps of ordinary quarks in a novel state of QCD matter could form at the end of the QCD phase transition along with ordinary hadrons and antihadrons in a cosmological scenario of separation of phases was first considered in [9]. The proposal noticed that the baryon charge hidden in these lumps would not participate in nucleosynthesis and, therefore, according to the usual definition would not contribute to ΩBh2  0.02
in spite of their QCD origin. These lumps would serve as “nonbaryonic” dark matter. This original proposal followed the theoretical observation [10] that at quark densities µ > 300 MeV, larger than the strange quark mass and a few times larger than the typical nuclear density, addition of strangeness should lower the quark chemical potential and ordinary baryonic matter could prefer to settle into a novel coherent ground state of three flavours of delocalized quarks, known as ‘strange quark matter’, rather than in ordinary hadrons.
The theoretical discovery of the color superconducting phases of QCD matter [7, 8] has stirred renewed interest on the cosmological scenario of separation of phases at the QCD phase transition. The interest now focus on the formation of lumps of CS phase [5, 6]. It is important to notice that, in the strict sense, lumps of color superconducting matter are not the hypothetical ‘strangelets’ predicted in [9], in spite of the obvious similarity. In color superconducting phases Cooper pairing at high density, rather than the addition of a third quark flavour, is the cause responsible for lowering the energy and favouring the formation of the novel coherent state: color superconducting phases could be made of three flavours of light quarks (like CFL phase) or only two of them (like 2SC phases). In addition, diquark Cooper pairing in color superconducting phases manifest in a large gap ∆ 100 MeV in the spectrum of single particle excitations [7] of quark matter, which could be a crucial feature to understand the phenomenology of these balls/antiballs of condensed matter. A gapped spectrum of fermionic excitations, on the other hand, is not a necessary feature of ’strange quark matter’.
We go further with this original idea introduced in [9] by suggesting that such dense objects could also be config-urations with large negative baryon charge (antilumps), made of condensed antiquarks in the color superconducting phase. As we discuss in next sections in details, in such a form the anti-baryon charge could coexist with a net number of hadronic baryons without annihilating due to the small volume occupied by the dense lumps and due to the specific properties of the interaction of normal hadronic matter with the lumps in superconducting state. Usual baryons (hadrons) could be reflected rather than annihilated when they hit an anti-ball with the small energy typical for the present cold universe (when v/c 10−3). A similar feature is known in the interaction of conduction electrons in metals at the interface with conventional superconductors [11]. More than that, the anti-baryon charge of the anti-ball would not change either the nucleosynthesis calculations because, locked in CS phase, it is not available to form nucleons, similar to the positive baryon charge locked in CS phase.
A complete understanding of the mechanisms that produce, in this scenario of separation of phases (and charges) at the QCD phase transition, a net excess of hadrons over antihadrons in the conventional phase should include an explanation of:
the mechanisms that lead to the formation at the end of the cosmological QCD phase transition of lumps and antilumps of condensed QCD matter/antimatter in color superconducting phase, coexisting with ordinary hadrons and antihadrons;
the mechanisms that avoid the evaporation and dissapearance of the lumps and antilumps once the temperature of the universe drops well below the temperature of the phase transition and allow their survival in the later colder universe;
the mechanisms responsible for the C and CP asymmetric separation of the baryonic charge in the two coexisting phases that leaves a net baryon number in the ordinary hadronic phase, and how this net excess of hadrons is preserved at later times after the separation has been completed and antihadrons annihilated;
the phenomenological viability of the proposed scenario when confronted with currently available observational data, in particular, with constrains on large amounts of antimatter in the visible universe.
The research on the cosmological scenario of separation of phases has focused, since the birth of the idea, on the problems of formation and survival of lumps of quark matter at TQCD in a universe that has already developed a net baryon asymmetry in the standard sense, as it was outlined in the original proposal [9]. In spite of all this attention, important questions about this scenario still remain open [5, 9, 12, 13]. The innovative aspect of our proposal, in

3

which antilumps of condensed antiquarks form along with lumps of condensed quarks and the cosmological baryon asymmetry only develops as a result of the net separation of charges, requires a re-evaluation of problems 1) and
2) plus an understanding of problem 3), which is obviously specific of our proposal. In this paper we shall focus, nevertheless, on a phenomenological study of the viability of our scenario when confronted with available observational data, problem 4), for reasons that are transparent: first, we must be convinced that the scenario that we propose is not ruled out; second, a complete study of the first three aspects is a more complicated task that can be addressed separately.
At this stage we cannot prove, let us state it clearly, that such dense objects of condensed quarks/antiquarks in color superconducting phase do form at the end of the cosmological phase transition. Neither, of course, we can precisely calculate some important phenomenological features of these droplets of condensed phase, such as
temperature Tf <	QCD at which the formation is completed, mass spectrum of resulting balls/antiballs or their
number densities. Such analysis would require a much deeper understanding of the non-equilibrium dynamics of non-perturbative QCD during the cosmological phase transition, which is not available at the present time. We understand, nevertheless, that we must present some fair evidence that issues 1), 2) and 3) can be successfully solved in order to make the proposal contained in this paper truly attractive. Indeed, we will argue below that a baryon asymmetric cosmological separation of phases can be a plausible, and even probable, output of the cosmological QCD phase transition.
Our analysis of the phenomenological viability of the scenario, problem 4), focuses on the interaction of massive chunks of condensed quarks/antiquarks with normal hadronic matter to check that the currently available observa-tional data neither rule out this picture nor even impose tight constraints on it. We show that large amounts of ordinary quarks and antiquarks can exist in the present universe stored in massive non-hadronic lumps/antilumps of CS matter, without contravening current observational cosmological constraints. Then we argue that in presence of large and homogeneous cosmological C and CP asymmetries over the whole visible universe at the onset of the QCD

phase transition, the observational values of both cosmological parameters ΩDM /Ω naturally in this scenario.
> 1 and n /n ~ 10−10 fit very

Let us add before closing this Introducion that many of the essential ideas of the scenario advocated here are elaborated versions of some old proposals. We have already mentioned that the idea that lumps of ordinary quark matter in a novel state, such as strange quark “nuggets”, may play the role of dark matter was suggested long ago [9], see also original papers [14] and relatively recent review [15] on the subject. It is also an old idea that dark matter may store large baryon (or even antibaryon) charge [18]. The idea that soliton (anti-soliton) -like configurations may serve as dark matter, is also not a new idea [16]. Maybe, the most noticeable example are Q-balls [17]. As well, the idea that baryon density could be inhomogeneous in space while the global baryonic charge is zero is old, see reviews
[19] and references therein. The new element of our proposal is an observation that one can accommodate all the nice properties discussed previously [14]-[19] but without invoking any new fields and particles (except, maybe, from a solution to the strong CP problem in QCD, see original papers and reviews in refs.[20]-[24]). Rather, the dense balls/antiballs of QCD matter are made of ordinary light quarks or antiquarks, which however are not in the “normal” hadronic phase, but in the color superconducting phase.
It is also an important point to be emphasized that the specific structure of the objects of condensed quark (antiquark) matter is not really relevant for our discussions. In principle, quarks/antiquarks could be stored in stable or long-lived metastable “nuggets” [9], CFL-strangelets [4], QCD-balls [6] or any other topological or non-topological solitons which have or have not been discussed previously, with the condition that they are stored in dense color superconducting state. As we already advanced this feature might be crucial to understand the phenomenology of balls and anti-balls and their interaction with surrounding hadronic matter.
Our presentation is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review the observational data related to the cosmological baryon asymmetry and argue in favour of the cosmological scenario of separation of phases as a natural framework to explain the origin of the asymmetry and solve the dark matter problem. Then we discuss the essential features of the interaction of hadronic matter with balls and anti-balls of condensed quarks/antiquarks to argue that well-known constraints on absence of significative amounts of anti matter in the visible universe can not be literally applied to the case when anti-matter is stored in dark massive droplets of the dense color superconductor phase. Moreover, we argue that under this hypothesis the observed relation ΩB  ΩDM is a natural consequence of the underlying QCD physics. Section 3 is devoted to the calculation of the reflection and transmission coefficients of free quarks inciding at the interface of the color superconductor. These results are used in Section 2 devoted to the observational constraints on antimatter in the present cold Universe at temperature well below the QCD phase transition. In Section 4 we discuss some generic aspects of the charge separation mechanism during the QCD phase transition, after noticing that all three Sakharov’s criteria could be satisfied (in some looser sense) when chunks of dense color superconducting matter/antimatter form during the phase transition. Finally, we estimate the fundamental parameter η (nB nB¯ )/nγ in this scenario. Section 5 contains our conclusions, where we speculate on possibilities to test the suggested scenario.

4

BARYOGENESIS VS BARYON SEPARATION

Observations and Phenomenology

Baryons in hadronic phase make all the directly observable astronomical objects, from gas and dust to stars and clusters of galaxies, without any significant trace of antibaryons over a spatial domain that could be as large as the present horizon, see reviews and some original papers in [25]. The origin of this asymmetric distribution of baryons and antibaryons remains one of the most fundamental open questions in cosmology in spite of the great theoretical and experimental efforts it has attracted during the last thirty five years, see e.g recent review [26].
The baryon-antibaryon asymmetry can be quantified through the ratio (nB  nB¯ ) / nγ, where nB and nB¯ are, respectively, the number densities of baryons and antibaryons and nγ the number density of photons in the cosmic background. Theoretical models predict, and observations confirm, that baryon number nB nB¯ is preserved in any comoving volume since the time of nucleosynthesis, at Tnc  1 MeV, and probably even earlier, since the instant just after the electroweak phase transition, at Tew 100 GeV. Indeed, the anomalous processes which efficiently violate the baryon number in the electroweak symmetric phase are effectively suppressed soon after the instant of the phase transition when the system is in the spontaneously broken phase. Since the number of photons in a comoving volume is also preserved, the ratio (nB nB¯ )/nγ remains approximately fixed in physical volumes while the universe is expanding and cooling.
If (nB nB¯ )  nγ, as it turns out to be the case, the early universe is approximately baryon-antibaryon symmetric until the QCD phase transition TQCD 160 MeV. This statement remains valid even if some asymmetry was generated at some earlier time. This is due to the strong QCD interactions in the quark-gluon plasma where massless
quark-antiquark pairs can easily be produced. Therefore, nB ~ nB¯ ~ nγ at T > TQCD. The universe becomes
manifestly baryon asymmetric only at the temperatures T < TQCD, when strong QCD interactions confine quarks
into heavy hadrons, with masses of the order of mN ~ 1 GeV which, subsequently, annihilate each other leaving only a small excess of hadronic baryons as the remnants, nB	nB¯	nB.
The ratio between the number density of this remnant of hadronic baryons and the number density of photons in
the cosmic background has been recently measured with high accuracy, η ≡ nB/nγ ≃ 6 × 10−10 [27]. This parameter
can be directly related to the ratio η ~  m  −1 between the mass of the nucleon m	and the temperature of matter-
radiation equality, Teq 1 eV. Its precise observational value is in excellent agreement with the present cosmological abundances of light elements predicted by the standard nucleosynthesis scenario, see e.g [28].
In generic scenarios of baryogenesis at any time earlier than the QCD phase transition the net asymmetry nB —nB¯ = ηnγ nγ should be fine-tuned to its observational value, in the sense that nB nB¯ nB, nB¯ . In most suggested scenarios the need of tuning the ratio η (when a natural scale for η is absent) manifests itself by the fact that η can be made either too large or too small by changing a few parameters that in many cases are only loosely constrained. In general, fine tuning is not considered as an atractive solution of a problem from a theoretical point of view when there is not a satisfactory explanation for the tuning itself. This is a very common feature of most scenarios for baryogenesis. As we shall see, such kind of fine tuning might not be required in the scenario of baryon separation advocated in the present work.
This is not the place to review all possible suggested scenarios for baryogenesis. However, we wish to briefly comment on the need of tuning of some sort in each of the current trends. For example, in supersymmetric electroweak scenarios the Higgs and stop masses must be carefully chosen to lie within narrow intervals to generate the observed value of η. Otherwise, any asymmetry which was developed at the electroweak scale will be washed out at the end of the phase transition. Other scenarios, like leptogenesis which relies on asymmetries generated at higher scales in channels that cannot be erased by electroweak physics, need also be carefully tuned. In Affleck-Dine scenarios the common problem is that too much asymmetry is generated and must be subsequently diluted. In summary, although the general conditions under which the asymmetry could have developed are well-understood, the final word about the specific mechanism and physics involved in it still remains to be found.

Baryon asymmetry and QCD

It is of natural interest to explore the possibility that the baryon asymmetry may have been generated not before the electroweak phase transition (as most scenarios suggest), but later, at the instant when the universe became manifestly asymmetric, immediately after the cosmological QCD phase transition. As we have argued, this might be a viable scenario relying on nonperturbative QCD physics that, in principle, does not require the introduction of any new physics beyond the standard model, except maybe for a solution of the strong CP problem. Obviously, in absence of baryon violating interactions at TQCD the only way to produce a baryon asymmetry is via charge separation. It is

5

to a discussion of such a mechanism in the context of a globally baryon-antibaryon symmetric universe, ntot = ntot,
B	B¯
to which we now turn. In such a scenario the ratio η is fixed by the energy scale of the physics involved and the
problem of fine tuning mentioned above is automatically resolved, see below.
This scenario for baryogenesis should be examined in the context of recent observations that confirm that baryonic (to be precise: the hadronic) matter contributes only a fraction of the matter content of the universe, while a much larger fraction is made of some unknown form of dark matter which is not apparent to detection through
electromagnetic radiation, ΩB ~ 1 ΩDM [27]. In this context, a net number of hadronic baryons nB — nB¯ /= 0 can be
generated at the QCD phase transition if some mechanism exists that separates baryon and antibaryon charges and
stores an excess of the latter in compact objects of non-hadronic, color superconducting phase discussed above. The non-hadronic objects, which however carry a large baryon charge B, have heavy mass MDM and would contribute, instead, to the ”non-baryonic” cold dark matter of the universe, according to the standard definition of the “non-baryonic” dark matter. Once the phase transition has been completed hadrons will annihilate anti-hadrons leaving at the end only the excess of the former plus an equal negative excess of baryonic charge in the objects of condensed phase. In this case a total baryon-antibaryon annihilation after the QCD phase transition would be avoided, even though B = 0, as we will discuss in detail in next sections. The separation of phases must be completed before the nucleosynthesis, at Tnc 1 MeV, such that only the surviving hadronic baryon number nB = ηnγ participates in the composition of light nuclei.
Let us assume that this hypothetical scenario is correct and dark matter indeed consists of heavy objects made of quark matter in color superconducting phase. What phenomenological consequences can we derive from this assumption? As the total baryon number is conserved and hadronic baryons have charge +1, the net number density of non-hadronic QCD-balls should be

1	1
nB¯ — nB = B (nB — nB¯ ) ≃ B nB,	(1)
where we introduce notation n describing the density of dark matter heavy particles which carry the baryon charge in a hidden form of the diquark condensate (CS phase) rather than in form of free baryons. Let then consider the ratio of dark matter number density ≡ n˜B + n˜B¯ to baryon number density ≡ nB. By definition,

 dark matter number density  ≃ mN ΩDM .	(2)

The dark matter number density could be naturally estimated, without any fine-tuning, to be

n˜B¯ + n˜B = #(n˜B¯ — n˜B),	(3)
where # is some numerical factor > 1, if the excess (nB¯ — n˜ ) is of the same order as the number densities n˜B¯ and n˜ .

#
(nB¯ + nB)/nB = #(nB¯ — nB)/nB ≃ B	(4)
according to eqs. (1,3). Consequently, from (2,4) we obtain

ΩDM /ΩB ≃ (#/B) × (MDM /mN ).	(5)
Now, if one demands B ≃ (MDM /mN ), which is a condition for the stability of the balls, one can immediately derive ΩDM /ΩB ≃ (#) > 1. The point we want to make is: our assumption that the dark matter is originated at the QCD
scale from ordinary quarks fits very nicely with ΩDM /Ω  > 1 within the order of magnitude, provided that separation

of baryon charges is also originated at the same QCD scale. Generally, the relation Ω	< Ω
, within one order of

B ∼	DM
magnitude, between the two different contributions to Ω is difficult to explain in models that invoke a dark matter
candidate not related to the ordinary quark/baryon degrees of freedom.

6

Cosmological scenario of separation of phases

The possibility that massive lumps of ordinary quarks in a novel state of QCD matter could form at the end of the QCD phase transition along with ordinary hadrons and antihadrons and serve as cold dark matter in a cosmological scenario of separation of phases was first considered in [9]. The idea has attracted since then a lot of effort [5, 6, 12, 13], but crucial questions about this scenario have remained open. Namely, the mechanisms of formation of the lumps and their survival once the temperature of the universe drops well below the temperature of the phase transition are not yet completely understood. While the formation of dense lumps during the phase transition is beyond the scope of the present paper, we nevertheless want to present some arguments to show that within a broad consideration of the thermodynamical parametrical space at the onset of the cosmological QCD phase transition a separation of phases that leaves a net baryon number in the conventional hadronic phase is a plausible, and even probable, output of the transition.
In the original proposal [9] it was discussed that lumps of quark matter would form adiabatically in a first order QCD phase transition in a two stages process. First, large bubbles of quark matter would form at TQCD in thermal and chemical equilibrium with the expanding hadronic phase. In a second stage these bubbles of quark matter would shrink, while delivering heat and entropy to the surrounding medium. The fate of the bubbles of quark matter depends largely on the leading mechanism of heat/entropy release. If it mainly proceeds through baryon evaporation at the surface of the bubbles, they will lose their mass and finally they will dissapear. On the other hand, if the heat/entropy release proceeds much faster than baryon number evaporation (for example, through emission of Goldstone modes), then a large baryon charge could get trapped within the walls of the shrinking bubble in thermal, but not chemical, equilibrium with the surrounding hadronic phase. In this case, the shrinking walls squezze the trapped baryon charge until the mounting Fermi pressure from within stops further shrinking. At this point the quark matter density within the bubble could reach the density threshold beyond which it organizes the diquark condensate.
A clear drawback of this mechanism is the requirement of a first order transition: current theoretical analysis and numerical simulations of the QCD phase transition seem to show that the transition is not first order, but a crossover, unless the strange quark mass is rather light. A different problem of this scenario has to do with the mechanisms that could avoid the evaporation of the balls of quark matter, in the case they indeed form, once the temperature of the universe drops well below the temperature of the QCD phase transition. Balls of quark matter can coexist in thermal equilibrium with the surrounding hadronic environment at temperatures close to the phase transition. It has been known that lumps of quark matter with large baryon charge B < 1040 would also be thermodynamically stable against
decay into ordinary nuclear matter at temperatures T < T , with T = 0.57∆ ~ 60 MeV, when they settle in color
superconducting phase: the typical binding energy is estimated in the literature to be of the order of ~ 50 MeV, per

baryon. But, at intermediate temperatures T
< T < T
the lumps of quark matter would be unstable and should

s ∼	∼  QCD
evaporate before they cool off to the temperature Ts at which they become stable configurations, see for example [5]
and references therein. To solve these problems one can imagine a scenario involving additional fields which make the formation of such lumps much more likely to occur. One particular example would be the frustrated collapse of axion domain walls immediately after the completion of the QCD phase transition [6]. This mechanism could work even if the QCD phase transition is second order or a crossover and the stability of the droplets of CS matter formed under the squeezing pressure of collapsing axion domain walls would supposedly be immediate if they form with sufficiently large baryon charge.
Either in its original form [9] or in the elaborated version [6], the mechanism of cosmological separation of phases through squezzing of quark matter within the walls of shrinking bubbles assumes, in a subtle way, that baryogenesis (in the standard sense of generation of net baryon number density nB/s	10−10) has already happened at some earlier stage before the QCD phase transition. Hence, when the initial bubbles of quark matter form in chemical equilibrium with the surrounding hadronic phase at TQCD they already carry a net baryon number nB/s	10−10, which is subsequently squezzed to higher densities nB/s	1 when the bubbles shrink. In order to implement a similar mechanism in our proposal, in which the average baryon number in the plasma is exactly zero B = 0 and the baryon asymmetry of the universe develops only as a consequence of the cosmological separation of phases, we should address, in addition, how the bubbles of quark matter can trap, while shrinking, either a positive or negative large baryon charge. This could happen, in particular, if the walls that contain the collapsing bubbles of quark matter show different penetrability for baryons and antibaryons. A typical example of such feature is the CP asymmetric axion domain walls, as suggested in [6], assuming the QCD plasma is already largely C asymmetric due to weak interactions. After this brief recall of the current status of ideas on the issues of cosmological formation and survival of lumps of quark matter, we wish to add a novel observation that could be of significative relevance for the understanding of the cosmological scenario of separation of phases at the QCD phase transition and the genesis of the cosmological baryon asymmetry and the dark matter content of the universe. First, let us notice that current lattice simulations that explore the dynamics of QCD matter at finite temperature are carried, due to analytical needs, for a plasma in which the quark chemical potential is exactly or very close to zero µ ≃ 0. This setup is thought to be a good

7

first approximation to the real QCD phase transition, because at T > TQCD the universe is closely baryon antibaryon
symmetric, nB nB¯  nB, nB¯ nγ , even in the case when baryogenesis (in the standard sense) has already occurred. This complacence is, notwithstanding, unjustified. In the quark gluon plasma at temperatures above the temperature of confinement there coexist three flavours of light quarks, u, d and s, and their corresponding charge conjugates. Each fermion can appear with two possible chiral orientations and two possible values for their helicity. That means that the quark plasma is characterized, in general, by twelve different chemical potentials µi, as color gauge symmetry guarantees that chemical potential for the three color orientations of each sub-specie are all equal. If the average baryonΣnumber is zero or close to zero, B ≃ 0, theΣn the twelve different potentials are constrained to add up to
the twelve chemical potentials can be considered as an unknown set of free parameters that fully characterize the thermodynamics of the cosmological QCD plasma. These parameters can, in principle, take values in a very broad range, only constrained by Maxwell-Boltzmann equations of thermal equilibrium