and its adjoint Q'. That is,
(10)

Toward a Unified Field Theory of Gravitation and Strong Interactions	305

The reason is that the Kerr metric involves null vectors and null vectors are represented by two-component spinors, which in turn can be related to Dirac spinors. Thus, a Heisenberg—Pauli spinor nonlinearity is to be expected.
A second quantized version of Eq. (2c) should show the quark model as a self-consistent Hartree—Fock “mean field” approximation. Heuristically, taking the asymptotic limit to flat space gives


/


Thus, asymptotically,
(lla)
(11b)


(11d)


(2d)

The numerical value of the asymptotic broken symmetry mass shift along the hypercharge direction is the indeterminate form
(12)
which can fail to be zero. It can be calculated explicitly given a â 0 generalization of the Kerr metric. The symmetry is broken because of the nonlinearity of general relativity. Adding an electromagnetic field can lift the degeneracy of the eigenvalues of the type Id Weyl tensor. Therefore,
a 3 term is added to the effective quark Lagrangian. Thus, we see the funda-mental explanation of why electromagnetism breaks isospin symmetry. The general relativistic picture given here can be used in strong f-gravity, in which case'"'
2J	(  protons  )'	(13a)
It can also be used with ordinary gravity provided that the quarks are “black holes” of Planck mass 10 * g (m*). In that case'"'
25 —— {m*c|h)’	(13b)


NOTE ADDED IN PROOF
The present analysis in terms of general relativity seems to give two natural candidates for the absolutely conserved, superselecting, quantum

306	Jack Sarfatti
numbers Q (electric charge) and B (baryon number). Thus, Hughston and Sommers"0' point out that type Id space—times have two commuting Killing vectors K Q) and K (B). Each Killing vector generates a one-parameter group of isometries. Suppose an electromagnetic field is switched on so that there is a nonvanishing stress tensor T . Then, as is well known (e.g., Ref. 11), each Killing vector gives a conservation law. Thus, the electric 4-current is defined to be
P°(Q) —— T°^Kz(Q)
and the baryonic 4-current is
P°(B) —— T°"Kz{B)

Then

P°(Q)„ —— P°{B)•.

—— 0

where a, b —— 0, 1, 2, 3, and the semicolon denotes covariant derivative. That is, the total four-dimensional flux over a closed surface of the component of the energy—momentum tensor along the Killing vector field vanishes. In summary, then, in my new way of looking at the problem of the space—time significance of internal quantum numbers, the 16 chiral SU{3) charges describe the eigenvalue structure of the curvature for type Id, and the superselecting quantum numbers describe the isometric structure of the Id metric.
When a source electromagnetic field is turned on, the full curvature has a Ricci contribution in addition to the Weyl contribution. The matrix elements of the Ricci curvature with respect to the Weyl eigenbivectors will not be diagonal and will therefore involve all the generators of SU(3).


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to acknowledge helpful comments from Dr. G. R. Tangherlini, Dr. J. Strathdee, and Prof. A. Salam, and financial support from NSF, IAEA, and Mr. Robert Toben of Chicago.


REFERENCES
L. Witten, Phys. Rev. 113, 355 (1959) ; R. Penrose, Ann. Phys. 10, 179 (1960).
S. L. Adler and R. F. Dashen, Current Algebras (Benjamin, 1968), p. 22.
A. Z. Petrov, Einstein Spaces (Pergamon, 1969).
R. J. Adler and C. She&eld, /. Math. Phys. 14, 465 (1973).

Toward a Unified Field Theory of Gravitation and Strong Interactions	307

J. Ehlers, W. R. Rindler, and I. Robinson, Perspectives in Geomett y and Relativit y (Indiana, 1962), p. 142.
B. Carter, Phys. Reu. 174, 1559 (1968).
J. Sarfatti, unpublished (1973).
C. J. Isham, A. Salam, and J. Strathdee, Phys. Rev. D 3, 867 (1971).
M. A. Markov, Souiet Physics—JETP 2A, 584 (1967) ; S. Hawking, Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 152, 75 (1971) ; L. Motz, Niiouo Cimento 12B, 239 (1972); J. Sarfatti, Nature
(Phys. Sci.) 240, 101 (1972) ; Gravity Research Foundation Essay 1973 ; Blackhole* of mass 10 * gm: Do they exist ?, ICTP Internal Memorandum, Trieste (1973).
L. P. Hiighston and P. Sommers, Commun. Math. Phys. 33, 129 (1973).
S. W. Hawking and G. F. R. Ellis, The Large-Scale Structure of Space—Time (Cam-bridge, 1973), p. 62.

Z. Naturforsch. 2018; aop


Hartmut Traunmüller*
Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


https://doi.org/10.1515/zna-2018-0217 Received April 28, 2018; accepted July 27, 2018

Abstract: First, this paper broaches the definition of sci-ence and the epistemic yield of tenets and approaches: phenomenological (descriptive only), well founded (solid first principles, conducive to deep understanding), provi-sional (falsifiable if universal, verifiable if existential), and imaginary (fictitious entities or processes, conducive to empirically unsupported beliefs). The Big Bang paradigm and the ΛCDM ‘concordance model’ involve such beliefs: the emanation of the universe out of a non-physical stage, cosmic inflation (hardly testable), Λ (fictitious energy), and ‘exotic’ dark matter. They fail in the confidence check that empirical science requires. They also face a problem in delimiting what expands from what does not. In the more well-founded cosmology that emerges, energy is con-served, the universe is persistent (not transient), and the ‘perfect cosmological principle’ holds. Waves and other field perturbations that propagate at c (the escape velocity of the universe) expand exponentially with distance. This results from gravitation. The galaxy web does not expand. Potential Φ varies as −H/(cx) instead of −1/r. Inertial forces reflect gradients present in comoving frames of accelerated bodies (interaction with the rest of the uni-verse – not with space). They are increased where the universe appears blue-shifted and decreased more than proportionately at very low accelerations. A cut-off accel-eration a0 = 0.168 cH is deduced. This explains the suc-cessful description of galaxy rotation curves by “Modified Newtonian Dynamics”. A fully elaborated physical theory is still pending. The recycling of energy via a cosmic ocean filled with photons (the cosmic microwave background), neutrinos and gravitons, and the wider implications for science are briefly discussed.
Keywords: Cosmic Redshift; Cosmology: Theory; Galaxies: Kinematics and Dynamics; Inertia; Scientific Method.

Introduction
Empirical science involves acquiring knowledge with an aim to organise, explain, and understand phenomena.

*Corresponding author: Hartmut Traunmüller, Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden, E-mail: hartmut@ling.su.se
Among this knowledge, the ‘existential’ (about what there is) and the ‘universal’ (such as physical laws) are espe-cially interesting. Universal knowledge, which is most prominent in Popper’s [1] philosophy of science, can be conceived of as a set of empirically testable universal state-ments that have not yet been convincingly falsified and so remain tenable. Science makes also existential state-ments, but these can only be verified rather than falsified empirically. If restrictions are stated, e.g. if something is claimed to exist at a specific place, verification as well as falsification may be possible.
In this conception of science, it is in neither case nec-essary for the postulates and hypotheses, which give rise to the statements, to be understood. It suffices for them to be tenable given the empirical evidence. However, it can be argued that the ultimate aim of basic research is to extend the body of empirical knowledge that can be rationally explained ab initio, i.e. without reliance on any assumption that is not understood. Such assumptions still have a function in science at a less advanced stage of devel-opment, but they are bound to remain tentative and pro-visional until they are shown to be either untenable or redundant (i.e. predictable within a wider frame). There is no better fate for a questionable postulate.
In order to really understand phenomena and the rela-tions between these, we need theories that rest on a foun-dation of solid knowledge. This may involve other well-founded, more fundamental theories. Ultimately, well-founded theories are based solely on definitions and first principles of the kind that cannot be easily rejected using the Cartesian method of doubt. These are principles that are accepted even outside the frame of the particular the-ory. Some are indispensable for there to be a theory at all. In the present paper, the notion of ‘first principle’ is always to be understood in this narrow sense.
An ‘axiom’ does not necessarily qualify as a first prin-ciple in our sense, but indispensable axioms whose valid-ity is independent of nature lie at the foundation of the formal sciences. These give us the rules of logic, algebra, and geometry, which then can be taken as first principles in all sciences. In other cases, it may not always be clear what can be taken as a first principle. However, any pos-tulate that is not rooted outside the theory it serves can be called into question and so does not qualify. A theory that builds on such a postulate is not well founded in the said sense, but speculative, conditional, and provisional. This remains so even if its predictions are compatible with all empirical evidence, no matter how accurately. It will

2 | H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


remain ‘just a theory’ even if ‘corroborated’ by evidence. While many theories are of this kind, there are also more well-founded ab initio approaches.
Physical ab initio approaches have been pursued in chemistry (e.g. ab initio quantum chemistry, ab initio molecular dynamics) perhaps more often than in physics itself. In physics, there is a strong tradition of attempt-ing to reconcile empirical knowledge with a few tradi-tional standard paradigms that may fall short of satisfy-ing the mentioned criteria of well-foundedness. It is well known that inferior paradigms and standards can persist because of the legacy they have built up, like the QWERTY layout in typewriters [2]. Such ‘path dependence’ is also prominent in the history, teaching, and practice of sci-ence. This had, in effect, already been noticed by Kuhn
[3] in his study of scientific practice, but the undesirable ‘lock-in effects’ of path dependence have not yet found the attention they require there. These have been mainly discussed in the field of economics, and the few papers on path dependence in epistemology also originated there [4, 5].
The history of science shows us that questionable assumptions on which previously established theories had been based tend to be retained not only as long as they remain compatible with the empirical evidence but as long as they can be made compatible with it by ad hoc means. Standard cosmology is a prominent case in point, and it had a less conspicuous precursor already in Newton’s questionable treatment of inertia as an effect of space (not of the matter in it), which Einstein retained and extended in general relativity (GR).
In current standard cosmology, the Big Bang (BB) paradigm is taken for granted. Because of its free param-eters and liberal allowance for evolution, it is flexible, but it happened that new or previously neglected evi-dence was found to be incompatible with it nevertheless. In such cases, a theory stands falsified until a convinc-ing explanation of the discrepancy is presented. Although this is clear enough, it is not very rare in scientific practice that falsifications are brushed aside by advancing excuses in the form of ad hoc assumptions and constructs, also purely imaginary ones, which can only be believed in. Such adherence to traditional paradigms is characteris-tic of what Kuhn [3] called ‘normal science’ as opposed to ‘revolutionary science’ and of what Lakatos called [6] a ‘research programme’. It is advantageous for those who aim for or depend on positive judgments by teachers, ref-erees, editors, and grant-providers, and for extensive col-laboration. However, approaches that require ‘credence’ in ad hoc assumptions can, in the long run, hardly be claimed to remain within the bounds of ‘science’ at all.
They are symptomatic of a degeneration of the science into a fossilised system of unquestioned doctrines.
We shall take a look at the epistemological status of the assumptions inherent in the standard model of BB cos-mology, namely the ΛCDM concordance model, and con-trast this model with the implications of alternatives in which ad hoc solutions are avoided and the most deeply rooted one of the questionable physical tenets, the associ-ation of inertia with space, is dropped, while conservation of energy is taken as a first principle and the ‘perfect cos-mological principle’ (PCP) as a generalizing assumption. The latter implies that the universe is persistent instead of transient. It will be shown that the astronomical evidence that requires excuses in order to maintain the BB paradigm appears to be immediately compatible with a persistent universe.

Method: Confidence Check
The common definition of ‘empirical science’ as ‘the pursuit of knowl-edge about nature’ is not accurate enough for our purposes. In addi-tion to ‘knowledge’, traditionally defined as ‘justified true belief’, we must allow for beliefs or, more objectively, for ‘statements’ that have only been shown to be ‘tenable’ rather than ‘true’, while high reliabil-ity is still strived for. Accidental truths of the type described by Gettier
[7] and unsystematic statements are to be excluded. This is achieved by a corresponding substitution for ‘knowledge’:
Empirical science is the pursuit of tenable and reliable systematic statements about nature.
This definition requires taking the confidence that premises deserve, and on which depends the empirical reliability of conclu-sions, into account. It dismisses approaches that fail in a confidence check. It also dismisses untestable hypotheses, the tenability and reli-ability of which cannot be checked. Although the definition implies that science strives for ultimate reliability, it defines science as a pur-suit, and tentative premises, hypotheses, and statements have a place in this pursuit as long as these remain tenable. Development and use of improved tools and methods is an integral part of the scientific pursuit that often contributes to its progress; but we are here not con-cerned with applied science, i.e. with the art of using science for the solution of practical problems.
Among scientific approaches to natural phenomena one can distinguish between inductive, phenomenological ones, which are founded on observations, and deductive ones, which are founded on theoretical premises. There is often interplay between these, e.g. an inductive approach may suggest a hypothesis that is subsequently used in a deductive approach. Definitions are essential in both types of approach. What distinguishes the approaches is the kind of conclu-sions the respective premises allow to be drawn with confidence and the resulting epistemic yield. The third type of reasoning, abductive inference (inference to the best explanation), is a form of induction that presupposes deduction.
In purely phenomenological approaches (type 1 in Tab. 1), regu-larities among observations (occasional evidence) are searched and described without offering an explanation. They yield organised particular knowledge, empirical relationships, and superficial or

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology  |  3


Table 1: Epistemologically different types of scientific approaches and tenets (1: inductive, 2: deductive), the confidence C these impart (a multiplicative variable), their type of adequacy, and their epistemic yield.


	Premises
	Foundation
	Confidence
	Adequacy
	Epistemic yield
	
	1
	Empirical evidence
	Definitions +
	C > 0
	Descriptive
	Superficial and/or probabilistic
	
	
	
	observations
	
	
	understanding
	
	2a
	Well-founded tenets
	Definitions + first
	C = 1
	Descriptive + explanatory
	Deep understanding (ab initio)
	
	
2b
	
Provisional tenets
	principles
Definitions + tentative
	
0 < C < 1
	
Descriptive + tentatively
	
Superficial and uncertain
	
	
	
	assumptions
	
	explanatory
	deeper understanding
	
	2c
	Fictitious tenets
	Definitions + fictitious
	C = 0
	Formal
	Empirically unsupported belief
	
	
	
	assumptions
	
	
	
	
	


probabilistic understanding. Phenomenological models make use of formalisms and free parameters. A well-known example is present in Kepler’s laws of planetary motion. Exploratory data analysis is an archetypal method. While occasional evidence can provide conclu-sive support (C = 1) for an existential statement, it can support a universal statement only by confirming its tenability (C > 0).
Theoretical, deductive approaches offer, in addition, an expla-nation of observations. They can provide support for universal state-ments to the extent to which we can be confident in their premises. In order to take this into account, it is necessary to distinguish at least three epistemologically different types according to the roots of the tenets they profess (types 2a, 2b, and 2c in Tab. 1).
(2a) First principles. In cases in which these are sufficient, they lead to well-founded theories and reliable predictions and to explanations that can be understood ab initio. Approaches that are founded on definitions and first principles alone embody the deepest understanding of phenomena. However, first prin-ciples can be invoked in all deductive approaches and even in otherwise empirically founded ones.
(2b) Tentative assumptions, also called ‘postulates’, that in some way appear reasonable but remain subject to doubt since they are not rooted outside the theory in question, and which can never be proven within it. These lead to provisional (conditional) theories and to explanations that hold to the extent to which the assumptions hold. This is characteristic of the ‘hypothetico-deductive method’ of science, which is prevalent in theoretical physics, but which fails to distinguish between the types 2a, 2b, and 2c, whose premises differ grossly in the confidence they lend. The method allows statements to be falsified if universal and verified if existential, but verification is not recognised as ‘scientific’ in Popper’s [1] ‘falsificationism’, in which the three types we distinguish here are not either distinguished.
(2c) Assumptions that, in addition to not being rooted outside the
theory in question, also lack independent empirical support. Any reasoning based on these remains within the domain of imagination. Such assumptions are ‘fictitious’¹ and lead to epis-temically void beliefs. Modern theoretical physics offers a range



By ‘fictitious’, we mean ‘merely existing in theory, not in reality’. In contrast, the so-called ‘fictitious forces’ are never fictitious in this common sense, but rather in the opposite sense, which reflects a theory-centred world view that is characteristic of theoretical physics.
of ‘fairy tale physics’ [8] in which fictitious assumptions are either primary, as in string theory, or secondary, as in the ‘dark sector’ of BB cosmology, discussed in Section 3.1.


The values listed in Table 1 under ‘Confidence’ express the confi-dence we can have in the tenets and the explanations these suggest. They depend on how well the tenets are rooted in what is already understood. We can be fully confident if the tenets are well founded (type 2a). If they really are, our confidence can remain undiminished (C = 1) even when we are confronted with discrepant empirical data. If, on the other extreme, an entity or process is fictitious within the frame of existing knowledge (type 2c), the confidence it deserves, its explanatory power, and its epistemic value cannot be asserted to be larger than zero (C = 0). This holds even if the approach leads to pre-dictions that are compatible with the evidence, no matter how well. The provisional approaches (type 2b) lie between the extremes 2a and 2c (0 < C < 1). In these cases, a numerical rating of confidence that would be generally valid is not obvious, except at the level of rank order. It is, e.g. justified to attach more confidence to a reason-ing based on a simple general assumption that has not been falsi-fied than to a less general alternative that can be said to involve the same assumption under a restrictive condition that needs to be spec-ified. The latter is equivalent to having two assumptions instead of just one, and the higher confidence in an approach that needs fewer assumptions reflects the principle of parsimony (Ockham’s razor), which applies here.
Sufficiently, even fully reliable predictions of entities that have never been observed are not precluded in this scheme. In order for us to be confident at C > 0 into their real existence, it is only required that C > 0 for each of the tenets on which the prediction is based.
While proposed laws of nature cannot be verified but only fal-sified empirically, even falsifications are not firmly conclusive. They are only valid within the frame of the knowledge we have. A state-ment that stood falsified may become tenable again in the light of new knowledge. Strictly speaking, universal statements can only be claimed ‘to be tenable’ or ‘to stand falsified’ unless it follows from definitions and logic alone that they are ‘true’ or ‘false’. The classi-fication of a tenet or a presumed entity as fictitious (C = 0) might also change in the light of new knowledge, but as long as we lack this knowledge, our confidence in it must remain at zero if we wish to remain within science. In cases in which C = 1 within the frame of our knowledge, we remain within science if we assume C ≤ 1, tak-ing into account that it might lower to C < 1 in the light of additional knowledge.

4 | H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


When confronted with discrepant evidence, the descriptive ade-quacy of a theory can often be saved by introducing an ad hoc param-eter. However, such a parameter has no explanatory power. Worse yet, it invites circular reasoning, and if it represents a fictitious entity, the approach turns into one of type 2c. This yields just an epistem-ically unsupported belief (C = 0), e.g. in dark energy. It promotes ‘credence’ – not ‘science’.
Some first principles, with C = 1, can be derived logically on the basis of more widely valid principles or well-founded theories, but ultimately there remains a basic physical principle that can neither be verified logically nor empirically with full certainty, despite its wide range of empirically proven tenability. Its classification as a first prin-ciple is, instead, due to its being indispensable for there to be any ‘law of nature’ and any explanatory science at all. It says that the same physical laws are valid everywhere in space, direction, and time. This universality principle expresses a precondition for physics.
There are several conservation laws that can be derived via Noether’s theorem from the homogeneity of space-time that is implied in the universality principle: conservation of energy follows from the homogeneity of time, conservation of linear momentum from that of space, and conservation of angular momentum from the isotropy of space. While these may be shown to follow from one general symmetry principle, theories do not gain in confidence if the number of first principles they invoke (all with C = 1) is min-imised. They gain in confidence if the number of tentative assump-tions (all with C < 1) is minimised, provided that they do not involve any fictitious assumption (with C = 0).
While homogeneity and isotropy of space-time belong to the set of first principles, this is not equally clear for the PCP. The PCP states that the distribution of matter in the universe is isotropic and homogeneous in space and in time.² Bondi and Gold [9] considered it a first principle that gives us a reason for assuming that the same physical laws are valid everywhere, but it appears that the matter dis-tribution in the universe is more in need of an explanation than the universality principle. The PCP is in any case a parsimonious gener-alising assumption. Not having it implies an epistemological deficit. The imperfect cosmological principle adopted in the BB paradigm exempts the temporal dimension of space-time, which is unproblem-atic in an absolute system of reference but cannot be generalised in Minkowski space-time.
The foundational elements of theories can be listed in the fol-
lowing order:
– definitions
well-founded first principles
generalising assumptions
more specific testable assumptions
assumptions involving fictitious entities or processes.

In order to obtain a clearly more well-founded theory, the number of lines required in this list needs to be reduced from its end. Provided that no assumption with C = 0 is retained, theories gain already in confidence if the number of tentative assumptions they invoke is reduced.



The ‘PCP’ needs the attribute ‘perfect’ only because the term ‘cos-mological principle’ is in use for the imperfect cosmological principle that is respected also in GR-based cosmologies.
Checking Standard Cosmology

The ΛCDM Model and Its Dark Sector

In the BB paradigm, which in the late 1990s resulted in the ΛCDM ‘concordance model’, the universe is finite in age and has emanated under conditions to which physics, as we know it, does not apply. The initial event and the primordial state belong to the fictitious domain. Our confi-dence in any claims that crucially depend on such an event and state cannot be any larger than zero. This does not bring the confidence in the whole paradigm down to zero, since the event is not introduced as an initial postulate but emerges as a conclusion. Concordance cosmology might still describe reality in approximation if not projected too far into the past.
It is well known that GR allows for an expanding uni-verse and for a contracting one but not for a stationary one, unless a cosmological constant (Λ) is introduced as a means of preventing the universe from collapsing, as in Einstein’s [10] own model of an eternal universe. Ein-stein had introduced Λ reluctantly, since it did not reflect anything known from physics.
Prior to the advent of BB cosmology, most natural philosophers considered the universe as eternal, but since antiquity there had been a split opinion concerning its spa-tial extension. According to one, the universe is spatially confined. This was still presumed by Copernicus. The com-peting conception of an infinite universe that perpetually regenerates itself and that contains infinitely many similar ‘worlds’, is also ancient. It was argued for by Epicurus, as communicated by Lucretius in De rerum natura, and after Copernicus by Giordano Bruno.
The first physical model of an expanding universe was presented by Lemaître [11], who already knew that the redshift x = (fiob – fiem)/fiem in the light from galax-ies tends to increase with their luminosity distance. Given the most ‘straightforward’ or ‘naïve’ interpretation of this phenomenon as a Doppler shift, the galaxies are rush-ing away from each other. This interpretation was adopted by Lemaître [11], but his model was not yet a BB model. It assumed eternal expansion from an initial state, at t = −∞, such as described by Einstein’s [10] model. In BB cosmology, Λ was skipped, but it was reintroduced in the ΛCDM model in order to make it compatible with the magnitude versus redshift relation of distant supernovae. A non-zero Λ had already been considered earlier in order to make the age of the universe indicated by the ‘Hub-ble constant’ H compatible with the estimated ages of the oldest star clusters.

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology  |  5


The interpretation of the cosmic redshift as due to an expansion of the universe is compatible with the observed redshifts, but it predicts the angular sizes of distant objects (galaxies, etc.) to be larger than in a non-expanding uni-verse.
In ‘tired light’ models, the universe does not expand. Instead, it is assumed that light loses energy as a result of interaction with ingredients of the intergalactic medium or for a reason with similar effects. In the tired light model that is most often considered, since Tolman [12], this loss causes a redshift in the light but no time dilation in its amplitude modulation. This type of model stands falsified, since time dilation in acceptable agreement with the red-shift has been observed in the light curves of distant super-novae [13–19] and in their spectroscopic aging rates [20]. In these cases, ‘entirely tired light’ has been observed, with a time dilation consistent with its redshift. While the label ‘tired light’ refers to a redshift mechanism that is compat-ible with the Epicurean tradition, it implies otherwise no particular cosmology.
Bondi and Gold [9] assumed their PCP to hold. Since they also considered the cosmic redshift as indicative of an expanding universe, they were led to the Steady State theory, in which creation is an on-going process by which the density in an expanding space is kept constant. This sets the Steady State theory apart from Epicurean cosmol-ogy, in which the PCP is also implied, while creation out of nothing is disallowed. Unlike the BB paradigm, which does not adhere to the PCP, and which allows models of ‘our universe’ (among other ‘universes’) to be adapted to new observations that falsify previous versions, the Steady State theory made more definite predictions. It lost adherence after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation, for which it provided no convincing explanation. It can be questioned whether it ever deserved confidence, since the perpetual creation it postulates has remained as fictitious as creation in BB cosmology.
The BB paradigm also fails to provide explanations for several kinds of observational facts. In order to retain it when faced with unexpected observations, it was nec-essary, in the process of time, to introduce and conven-tionalise more and more free variables and fudge factors. Some of these arise directly as rational conclusions that can be drawn if the paradigm is accepted a priori. The most important were, in temporal order, (i) dark matter, (ii) cos-mic inflation, (iii) dark energy, and (iv) a particular size evolution of galaxies.
Dark matter was suggested by the observed cohesion of galaxy clusters [21, 22] and by rotation curves of individ-ual galaxies [23]. These would require much more than the
visible matter to be present in order to be compatible with classical mechanics (CM) and GR. Initially, the hypothe-sis that unseen matter in form of gas, dust, and substellar objects is responsible for the discrepancy was reasonable (C > 0). This matter would need to be present in haloes around galaxies and additional amounts in galaxy clus-ters. Since the discovery of the discrepancy, the presence of large amounts of gas in galaxies has in fact been veri-fied, but it does not have the required mass and distribu-tion. Neutrinos may also be considered, but the number that would be required by far exceeds the number that can be expected to have been created in a BB universe. Dark matter in form of hypothetical weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) is more problematic. Since attempts to verify the existence of WIMPs experimentally have so far failed, it is not justified to attach a non-zero confidence to them. They remain of type 2c in Table 1. As long as the required amount of dark matter is neither predicted on independent grounds nor empirically confirmed to be present, its supposed presence remains an excuse with C = 0. This means in fact that, at the present state of our knowledge, GR and CM stand falsified already at the scale of galaxies. Therefore, we cannot be confident in models of the whole universe based on these theories. CM actually stood falsified already because of the anomalous perihe-lion advance of Mercury when the search for the suppos-edly responsible planet Vulcan had failed, although the method and procedure had proven successful by the dis-covery of Neptune. The problem with Mercury was solved by substituting GR for CM. The more general and more substantial problem with the dynamics of galaxies is still awaiting its solution – which will emerge smoothly in Section 4.
Unless the missing mass is actually present and dis-
tributed accordingly, the rotation curves of disc galaxies suggest that the ratio of inertial to gravitational forces is reduced at low accelerations, with a transition value of a0 ≈ 1.1 × 10−10 m/s2. This is the essence of Milgrom’s
[24] modified Newtonian dynamics (MoND), which allows accounting for the rotation curves of all kinds of galaxies in terms of a single function [25]. MoND also provides an explanation for the Tully-Fisher relation, which describes the otherwise unexplained close relation between lumi-nosity and rotation velocity of galaxies. While MoND describes regularities that remain unpredicted by the dark matter hypothesis, it represents a phenomenologi-cal approach comparable to Kepler’s approach to plan-etary motion. It has been shown to be successful for a wide range of different galaxies. This includes galaxies with very low mass, in which the discrepancy with CM and GR is substantially larger than in the galaxies considered

6 | H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


when MoND was originally proposed [26, 27]. The fact that MoND describes the rotation curves of galaxies success-fully in terms of a function that is at variance with CM and GR suggests that something is wrong with these theories, although MoND still requires substantial amounts of dark matter to be present in galaxy clusters [28]. While MoND has not been embraced by the mainstream, the existence of a close mass discrepancy versus acceleration relation in disc galaxies needs to be taken into account neverthe-less [25, 29–31]. It cannot be denied, and it calls for an explanation.
Among the deductive approaches to MoND, two alternatives can be distinguished: (i) modified gravita-tion (increased where g < a0) and (ii) modified inertia (decreased where g < a0). The theories proposed so far [32, 33] are of type i. They involve, in addition to the Newtonian gravitational force, which varies proportional to r−2, an otherwise unknown force that varies propor-tional to r−1. In a different approach [34], a Newtonian force combines with a Yukawa type of force instead. So far, no deductive approach to the dynamics of galaxies provides a deep understanding. Keeping GR and introduc-ing a new additional force whose existence has not been verified does not bring about any higher confidence than C = 0. Our confidence in MoND as a phenomenological model is above zero, but this model offers no explanation for Milgrom’s constant a0 and the chosen interpolating function between the regimes a ≪ a0 and a ≫ a0.
Cosmic inflation [35, 36] was conceived as a theoret-ical possibility within quantum field theory [37]. It has come to serve the purpose of reconciling the fact that the universe appears flat, clumpy, and yet homogeneous on the largest scale with the BB paradigm, in which such an outcome would be extremely unlikely. It increases the likelihood of the outcome but assumes physics itself to have been expediently different when the universe had not yet reached an age of 10−32 s. The tenability of the whole approach has long been under debate even among those who had proposed it [36, 38]. There were several consecutive versions, all of which were either shown to stand falsified, not to be testable because they allow for any outcome, or not to fulfill a less obvious condition. For details, which remain out of focus in the present paper, see [38]. Quantum field theory allows modelling statisti-cal detail in the CMB with high accuracy. This ‘precision cosmology’ is often advanced as an argument in favour of an inflationary BB model, e.g. in [39]. However, such preci-sion does not guarantee that the theory is well founded. In this particular case, there is also a cyclic model of the uni-verse [40] that appears to fit the observations equally well. Unfortunately, it also involves questionable assumptions.
Dark energy is an unpredicted, fictitious form of energy with anti-gravitational properties. It is an embod-iment of the cosmological constant Λ, which Einstein [10] introduced as a fudge factor (in the form of an integra-tion constant) when he still believed that the universe ought to be static. This Λ was reintroduced in order to make the observed magnitude versus redshift relation of distant type Ia supernovae compatible with the BB paradigm [41, 42]. In the alternative quintessence cosmol-ogy, Λ is treated as a parameter that is allowed to vary over time [43].
Assuming the existence of non-baryonic dark matter and dark energy has sometimes, e.g. [44], been compared to Pauli’s hesitant prediction of the neutrino, whose exis-tence was verified only 25 years later [45]. These cases had in common that the existence of an entity that had not been known previously was suggested by abductive reasoning. However, the foundations on which these sug-gestions rested were epistemologically very different. The nuclear mechanism known as β-decay appeared to violate a first principle: conservation of energy. Given that this is a principle of the kind in which we can be confident even when faced with evidence that appears to contradict it, the existence of a new particle, which was later named the neutrino, was the simplest conclusion that could be drawn. This was not a fictitious assumption but a well-founded prediction. In contrast, the magnitude versus red-shift relation of a type of supernovae appeared to violate just the BB paradigm, in which it was not justified to be confident, and which rests on a theory (GR) that in fact stood falsified already in view of the dynamics of galaxies. The BB paradigm stands falsified also in view of this mag-nitude versus redshift relation. Λ (dark energy) remains a fictitious excuse that lends no confidence to any reasoning about reality that is based on it.
In models in which the PCP holds, the factor by which waves are stretched per unit of distance D is necessarily constant and everywhere the same. If no other mechanism contributes to the redshift x, we have
1 + x = exp(︂ H D)︂,	(1)


where the Hubble parameter H is a true constant (units s−1 or km/s/Mpc). In BB models, H is a variable and the relation is more complex.
Equation (1) can be inverted, and D can be calculated
as

D(x) = c ln(1 + x).	(2)
H

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology  |  7


30

29

28

27

26

25

24

23


22
0.0
0.1	0.2	0.3	0.4	0.5	0.6
0.7	0.8	0.9	1.0

D(z) in Hubble distance units = ln(1 + z)
Figure 1: The constant in (4) suggested by each individual one of the 892 supernovae of type Ia considered in Traunmüller [46]. It is here plotted against the z-based distance according to (2). Its overall median is 24.13 magnitude units (mean 24.23, standard deviation 0.524).

In BB cosmology, the relation between the redshift fac-tor and distance indicators such as the apparent magni-tude of type Ia supernovae is more complex than what (1) and (2) imply.
In a static and flat geometry, the intensity (W/m2) of light received from a source, the flux F (‘apparent luminos-ity’) varies as F ∝ D−2. F is proportional to the absolute luminosity L, defined as the total power radiated by the object. If both the energy of each photon and the number of photons arriving per time unit are reduced by factors of (1 + x)−1 and if no additional factors are involved, this gives us for an object that radiates isotropically

Figure 1, m − 5log [(1 + x)ln(1 + x)], i.e. the constant in (4), is plotted against ln(1 + x) for the individual data from Traunmüller [46]. Some variation is expected because the sources are not all of the same absolute magnitude, because of uncertainties in the measurement of m, and, at the lowest distances, because the proper motion of the sources can affect x noticeably. The observed statis-tical distribution is skewed, its dispersion varies to some extent, but its central tendency shows no significant vari-ation with distance D(x).
The conclusion that the redshift factor (1 + x) increases exponentially with distance (1) was also arrived
at in an investigation [49] in which the same tendency was

F =	L
4πD2(1 + x)2
.	(3)
shown to be present also in data from gamma-ray bursts. The redshifts of these exceed those of the observed super-

While (3) has been claimed to be valid in tired light models as well [46], the number of photons arriving per time unit was not reduced in the casual analysis [12] on which the ‘Tolman test’ is based. In this case, we get a factor of (1 + x) in the denominator of (3) instead of (1 + x)2.
Recently, an analysis of redshift and magnitude data from 892 type Ia supernovae, which are the best ‘standard candles’ we have, has shown that the two Ds that can be calculated on the basis of the redshift (1) and flux (3) are proportional to each other [46], so that the astronomical magnitude m satisfies the relation

m = 5 log[(1 + x) ln(1 + x)] + const.	(4)

This had already been observed previously [47, 48]³ in a smaller set of data that was available then. In

I was not aware of [47–49] and [50] when submitting my paper [46].
novae substantially, but it is questionable to what extent they are due to the distance of the sources. They had been taken into consideration for testing models that involve a Λ parameter [50].
It is clear a priori that a good fit can be obtained in BB cosmology if Λ is allowed to vary as a function of time. Even if constant, Λ just describes the error of the Λ-free model, and such fudge factors lack explanatory power. The possibility of its use does not threaten the empirical validity of the simple relation (4), which follows form (1) and (3) and the definition of m. In a ΛCDM model, the cor-responding relation, m(x; ΩM, ΩΛ), is more complicated and less elegant since it requires numerical integration. If neither ΩM nor ΩΛ was fictitious, an alternative that con-forms to (4) directly would still be preferred because of the parsimony principle.
Size evolution of galaxies: If the universe expands
in proportion to a scale factor a so that a(t) = (1 + x)−1 while gravitationally bound objects, such as galaxies, do not expand, the angular size δ of these will be, in the

8 | H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


small-angle approximation, δ ≈ (1 + x)d/D, where d can be the major axis diameter of a galaxy and D its comov-ing distance. This angle is enlarged by the redshift factor over that in a flat and static universe, where δ ≈ d/D. While tired light models predict δ ∝ ln(1 + x)−1, all models in which the universe expands, but not the galaxies, predict the relation to flatten substantially with increasing x and δ to slowly increase again at large values of x. With exponen-tial expansion, the prediction is δ ∝ (1 + x)ln(1 + x)−1 with a minimum for δ at (1 + x) = e. In the past, when angular sizes were still considered to make a crucial test of the paradigm possible [51, pp. 23–25], several investi-gations returned instead an approximate empirical rela-tion of δ ∝ x−1 [52, 53]. Meanwhile, measurements of the angular sizes of galaxies have progressed in scope and reliability without leading to a substantially different result [54]. Allowing a reasonable margin for uncertain-ties, the observations are, instead, immediately compati-ble with what would be expected in a universe in which the PCP holds. If the BB paradigm is taken for granted nevertheless, this suggests that galaxies grow in size as d ∝ a(t) [55–57] or slightly more, as d ∝ (1 + x)−1.2 [58]. It is justified to attach some confidence (0 < C < 1) to this suggestion, since galaxies are expected to evolve in some way within the BB paradigm. This evolution was formerly thought to affect mainly the luminosity rather than the size of galaxies. There is now a hierar-chical theory of galaxy formation, with many free param-eters [59], according to which galaxies grow by merg-ers of smaller pieces, dominated by dark matter. This allows modelling the empirical data, but it is an addi-tion to the ΛCDM model – not a prediction made by it. A very extensive investigation of 4993 Lyman break galax-ies (4 < x < 10) reported, within standard cosmology, a growth by (1 + x)−1.26±0.17 for the mode, (1 + x)−1.10±0.06 for the median, and (1 + x)−0.95±0.07 for the mean [60], which happens to be close to a(t) = (1 + x)−1.
More recently, the dark sector has been enriched by
dark flow. This is an observed large-scale bulk flow of galaxy clusters that appears to be in conflict with concor-dance cosmology. It has been tentatively ascribed to influ-ences from pre-inflationary inhomogeneities [61, 62]. Even a dark force, a fifth force that affects only the fictitious kind of dark matter, has been contemplated [63]. This leads deep into fairy tale physics.
ΛCDM concordance cosmology stands out as exceed-ingly speculative. Scientists who are not bound to the path that has led to it can easily see (i) that CM and GR stand falsified at the scale of galaxies and subsequently are not reliable at any larger scale either, and (ii) that the cosmic redshift probably has been misunderstood and so given
rise to fudge factors in addition to dark matter. Although even the adherents of concordance cosmology do not usu-ally claim that they understand the universe, it is clear that by pursuing an approach that deserves no confidence, they have driven the discipline into a veritable Dark Age. When a theory persists in standing falsified, it is likely that a wrong choice has been made at a branching of the path that has led to it. In such cases, one should preferably search for the right path, instead of proceeding on the once chosen path and dreaming up an imaginary environment (WIMPs, dark energy, etc.) in which this would be the right path. In Section 4, we will show where this wrong choice has been made. Here, we shall turn ourselves to an even more basic failure than inattention to the considerations summarised in Section 2.

The Delimitation Problem
Within GR based cosmology, galaxies are thought of as essentially remaining at rest in an expanding space that brings light waves to expand with it. Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) models and other GR-based alter-natives describe the relation between space-time affected by gravity and the increasing scale factor a(t) and space-time in absence of these influences, e.g. in the equation for the line element. Standards of comparison, such as sources of radiation and the meter, which is defined in terms of light waves, are treated as if they remained unaf-fected. This is a startling fallacy if it is done without a motivation. However, it appears empirically right, because it immediately predicts an observable cosmic redshift as well as the observable shifts due to gravitation. If every-thing would be treated alike, and no forces were at work, the calculable wavelength shifts would remain unobserv-able. The fallacy appears to reflect the idea of the ‘rigid ruler’ of CM, which continues to be tacitly relied on despite the fact that not even space itself remains ‘rigid’ in GR-based cosmologies. It can, thus, also be blamed on path dependence. A flawless treatment requires an explicit cri-terion for delimiting what expands from what does not. FRW models as such do not offer such a criterion. The so-called Swiss cheese models [64] allow modelling regions in which different metrics apply, but standards of compar-ison are still tacitly exempted even in these. Instead of a more refined metric, we need a tenable rule for when the metric is not to be used at all.
The delimitation problem is avoided – it does not arise to begin with – in the popular pseudo-Newtonian approach, in which ‘expansion’ is an attribute of struc-tures and distances rather than of ‘space’ in a substanti-valist sense. In this approach, the expansion takes effect

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology  |  9


only to the extent to which it is not prevented by forces. In this matter, gravitation is not treated differently from other forces. Thus, it is, essentially, assumed that
(Criterion 1) free waves and incoherent objects expand – coherent objects do not.
In such an approach, it has been calculated [65] that expansion sets in at a radius of 10 Mpc for a structure like the Virgo cluster, which comprises more than 1000 galaxies within a radius of less than 3 Mpc. If the coher-ence extends this far, Criterion 1 leaves only the larger voids between galaxy clusters to expand.⁴ However, one can doubt whether even these could expand. The uni-verse looks like a three-dimensional web of galaxy clus-ters, which are connected to their neighbors via filaments whose matter density appears to suffice for coherence along their axes. Persistent filaments would prevent even the voids from expanding. It is, at least, clear that the regions that now cohere would have overlapped when the BB universe was younger, which would have prevented its expansion altogether. Therefore, this approach fails to offer a workable delimitation between what expands in a BB universe and what does not. As discussed under ‘size evolution of galaxies’ in Section 3.1 and by López-Corredoira [54], the observed angular sizes of galaxies (8, Tab. 3), are also hard to reconcile with an overall expan-sion. However, Criterion 1 remains compatible with a non-expanding universe, in which any signals that propagate at c expand, while the infinite cosmic web is, essentially, static.
It is also possible to consider the expanding entities of Criterion 1 as static while coherent objects and structures shrink and processes speed up [46, 66]. In short,
(Criterion 1b) coherent objects contract – free waves do
not.
With Criterion 1, the expansion is exponential; with Criterion 1b, the contraction is exponential in reciprocal proportion.⁵ Criterion 1b describes the same situation as Criterion 1 in a frame of reference that is co-expanding with the waves. Any observable effects are the same. If the cosmic web is coherent, there is no observable expan-sion or contraction of objects of any size. The entities that contract in the contraction model (1b) include any real standards of comparison. The material universe remains, therefore, metrically static and so compatible with the

The pseudo-Newtonian approach has a problem with recession
PCP⁶. The metric space being the same, this brings us back to the expansion model with Criterion 1.
Within the frame of GR, on which the FRW mod-els are based, Criterion 1 appears incongruous since GR does not draw a distinction between coherent and inco-herent objects. Instead, it draws a distinction between non-gravitational forces and gravitation, linking the lat-ter directly with space. This link is broken in Criterion 1 by exempting gravitationally bound objects from the expan-sion. GR rather suggests delimitation between a space in which radiation propagates, which is also the space of gravitation, and the space of non-gravitational forces, which can be equated with that of CM. A corresponding assumption would be that
(Criterion 2) anything under free gravitation expands – objects under control of other forces do not.
This alternative predicts the universe, the cosmic web, galaxies, and planetary systems all to expand, which is incompatible with the PCP but not necessarily with the observations. The angular size discrepancy may disappear if galaxies participate in the expansion. Further, if plane-tary systems expand, this would be reflected in an increase of the astronomical unit (AU). With AU = 149.6 × 109 m, and H = 60 km/s/Mpc, there would be a secular increase by 17.8 m for expansion by (1 + z). A secular increase of the AU by 15 ± 4 m has actually been reported to be present in empirical data [68]. Essentially the same expla-nation might also account for the increasing eccentric-ity of the lunar orbit [69]. However, Pitjeva and Pitjev
[70] reported a non-significant increase of the AU by only
1.2 ± 3.2 m per century (at the 3σ level).
As for the rotation curves of galaxies, Criterion 2 amplifies the discrepancy with the astronomical observa-tions. Aside from this trouble, it does very well if it is true that planetary systems and galaxies participate in the gen-eral expansion, or perhaps just in the expansion suppos-edly caused by dark energy (roughly 50 %) [71]. The effi-cacy of Criterion 2 can be falsified by demonstrating that the AU does not increase correspondingly. The reports of its increase [68, 69] or absence of significant increase [72] were based on results that are highly sensitive to small errors of various kinds.
An error that might feign or hide a change in the AU appears to be the cause of the ‘Pioneer anomaly’ [72, 73]. This is an unexplained acceleration of about
8.7 × 10−10 m/s2 directed towards the Sun, observed in

velocities >c, which require switching to a substantivalist space		

again, but the velocities involved here remain ≪c.
Wetterich [67] considered an equivalent contraction model even for concordance cosmology, whose expansion becomes exponential at both of its extremes but lacks an overall inverse function.
In [46], such a model is described (not fully understood) as making different predictions from expansion models. However, if the cosmic web does not expand, correct predictions based on Criteria 1 and 1b will agree.

10  |  H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


the trajectories of space probes. While the anomaly was explained away as a thermal effect [74], it rather reflects an erroneous modification in the acquisition or processing of data that was introduced in 1990. This is evident from an exercise in which publicly accessible data were analysed in order to verify the anomaly [75]. The graphs in that paper show that there was no anomalous acceleration before a certain date, when it suddenly appeared and remained in the data from both Pioneer 10 and 11 (launched 13 months later). This goes unmentioned in the cited papers [72–75]. Since the mistake, perhaps GR related,⁷ turns up in the tracking of at least two space probes and remains there over the years, it may be present also in data that have been used in investigations of the constancy of the AU [68–70]. This needs to be cleared up in order to judge whether Crite-rion 2 is tenable or stands falsified if the PCP is allowed to be violated and the dynamics of galaxies to be left an open problem.
If the PCP holds and the cosmic web is coherent, Criterion 1 implies that the material universe is ‘static’ on all scales, while waves are stretched. If the factor by which waves are stretched per unit of distance is constant and everywhere the same, the redshift factor (1 + z) will increase exponentially with distance D. If the number of periods between a source of radiation and the observer is conserved, which is the case in ‘entirely tired light’ models, the expanded distance Dexp can be calculated by integration as
Dexp = exp(︂ H D)︂ − 1.	(5) Under this condition, Dexp is simply proportional to z
Dexp = c z.	(6)
H
The expansion is illustrated in Figure 2. Dexp is a dis-tance that is valid for signals that propagate at c. Since
(5) and (6) hold irrespective of frequency, down to zero, they also hold for the effective lengths of lines of force. It is noteworthy that the unexpanded distance 2D from a source to a mirror and back can theoretically be measured by counting the periods of a stable monochromatic signal that can be sent towards the mirror until the first period of


In [73] one can read: One can demonstrate that beyond 15 AU the dif-ference between the predictions of Newton and Einstein are negligible. This is said without telling that it holds only for observations made from a still larger distance – not for those made by us from Earth. This evokes a suspicion that the Pioneer anomaly may have arisen from a similar inadvertence.

/
S	O

Figure 2: An unexpanded wave train (below) from source S to observer O at distance D = 0.5 Hubble length units (cH−1) and its expanded equivalent (above). The chosen D gives a red-shift z = 0.649 and an expanded distance Dexp = 0.649 cH−1 (1.297 D).


the reflected signal returns. No period is lost, and the sig-nal propagates at c, while the distance it appears to cover expands together with the wave. Not only waves but any field modulations that propagate or are maintained at c are dilated in this way, whereby all slopes and gradients become successively smaller.
If the effective distance of a planet from a star or of a star from a galactic center is cz/H instead of r, which is implied here, the gravitational attraction will be slightly reduced, but in most cases the difference between cz/H and r will be small enough to be neglected.
Criterion 1 is not explicit about the reason for the dilatation, but one can easily see a reason for waves to expand if one considers c as the maximum velocity of non-escape from the empirical universe (from inside the ‘light cone’). Under this premise, anything that moves at c will have to overcome an omnipresent non-zero grav-ity gradient: it will be pulled back by the gravity of the universe, which in Section 4.2 will be shown to be finite. This is tantamount to an explanation of c. The gradient is nearly insensitive to an inhomogeneity in mass distribu-tion such as observed in the universe and which would need to be considered if the Friedmann model was to be applied [76]. It will be disproportionately smaller for any-thing that moves at v < c, when the distant masses no longer pull in the same direction. Such cases remain out-side the frame of the present paper, which, in addition to objects that move at v ≪ c, is primarily concerned with waves and signals that propagate exactly at c. For these,
(5) and (6), illustrated in Figure 2, are valid.
The two delimitation criteria are contrasted in Table 2. For both, a contraction model has been entered in addi-tion to the equivalent expansion model. One is free to choose one of the two ways of regarding the situation. There is no such freedom if fudge factors are introduced in the way this is done in ΛCDM cosmology, and the two ways result in equally simple descriptions only if expan-sions/contractions are exponential functions.
Criterion 1 reflects the practice in BB cosmology, which, as we have seen, appears to be incompatible with

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology | 11


Table 2: Delimitation criteria of cosmological models in which expansion is exponential as in (1) and (2), flux F ∝ [(1 + z) ln(1 + z)]−2 (7).

Delimitation criterion	Expansion models (entities that expand)	Contraction models (entities that contract)

Coherence	Free waves and incoherent objects (radiation, slopes and gradients propagating or maintained at c; universe if incoherent)
Gravitation	Anything under free gravitation (waves, universe, cosmic web, galaxies, planetary systems)
Coherent objects (atoms, rocks, planets, stars, galaxies, galaxy clusters; cosmic web if coherent)

Objects under control of non-gravitational forces
(atoms, rocks, planets, stars)


/
The entities that contract in contraction models are those that remain unaffected in expansion models.


an expanding material universe. It is, however, compati-ble with a cosmology in which the PCP holds and which, unlike CM and GR, offers an explanation for inertia, as detailed in Section 4.3. It appears also to be compatible with the empirical data unless the AU actually increases as it would according to Criterion 2. This needs to be checked empirically if the PCP is not trusted.
Criterion 2 is in the gist of GR, in which gravitation is special by being linked to space. It implies an expand-ing universe in which also planetary systems expand, but the empirical flux versus redshift relation (7) suggests the expansion to be exponential, as it is in SEC [77], in which, however, the delimitation criterion has not been made explicit either. In the de Sitter universe [78], any measure-ments are imaginary since it contains no matter, but this is not much different in FRW models, which, strictly speak-ing, do not either contain any of the aggregations of mat-ter, such as atoms, instruments, planets, stars, and galax-ies, but only an abstract fluid. We shall restrict the further discussion to models in which Criterion 1 applies.
Even if a contraction model (Criterion 1b) is mathemat-ically equivalent to an expansion model (Criterion 1), there is a heuristic difference between the two. Model 1 suggests the mentioned explanation of the redshift. This is hidden in model 1b, which discloses no direct explanation for the contraction of coherent objects either. On the other hand, model 1b makes it obvious that there must be time dilation in proportion to the redshift factor. This is not immediately clear in model 1, which might, mistakenly, be thought to lack overall time dilation.


In Search of a Tenable Cosmology
Principles and Explananda

If cosmology is to be an empirical science, it is a mini-mum requirement that its tenets impart more than zero confidence. The theory must not assume any unpredicted fictitious entities or processes to be in effect. Ideally, it should be based on definitions and first principles alone.
In addition to these, only the most generalising assump-tions shall be accepted. To these belongs the PCP:
The universe is homogeneous and isotropic in time as well as in space.
Such a universe is persistent instead of transient. Its statistical properties do not change as a function of time, space, and direction. The PCP should, however, only be assumed to hold within volumes that are sufficiently large – that of a Hubble sphere or larger. Up to distances of at least 200 Mpc, the observed distribution of matter is actually far from homogeneous – it is rather fractal [76].
The PCP puts a narrow constraint on the redshift ver-sus distance relation. Abstracting influences of nearby masses away, the function must be self-similar and the same everywhere in space-time: in a flat geometry, this can only be a constant exponential function (1 + z) ∝ exp(D), so that (1) and (2), which, in addition, only contain the con-stants H and c, must hold. Further, if extinction of light is negligible or compensated for, (3) and (4) must also hold. This is in adequate agreement with the empirical flux ver-sus redshift (and magnitude vs. redshift) relation of super-novae SN1a [46], which corroborates the tenability of the PCP.
In order to be tenable, a cosmological model must account for the four explananda in Table 3. Unfudged BB models account for time dilation but fail for the other three. Cosmologies with exponential expansion, such as the ‘scale expanding cosmos’ (SEC) theory [77] and the model by de Sitter [78]⁸ in addition account for the flux ver-sus redshift relation, but the latter model has the blatantly fictitious property of containing no mass. The observed angular sizes of galaxies are at variance with the distance-duality relation. This relation [79] is said to hold if photons travel along null geodesics in a Riemannian geometry, and


This model is said to evolve as a(t) ∝ exp(Ht), but in de Sitter’s original conception, there was no real expansion: the frequency of light-vibrations diminishes with increasing distance from the origin of co-ordinates. The lines in the spectra of very distant stars or nebulae must therefore be systematically displaced towards the red, giving rise to a spurious positive radial velocity.

12  |  H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


Table 3: Some explananda of cosmological theories.

Phenomenon	Expression
Time dilation factor	1 + z
SB is much lower than that of a black body. In the case of stars in distant galaxies, the problem remains an academic one, since these are bound to remain point-like sources for which SB cannot be measured.

Flux versus redshift relation and Magnitude versus redshift relation Angular diameter of galaxies
Cut-off acceleration a0 of galaxies (in MoND)
F ∝ [(1 + z) ln(1 + z)]−2,	(7)

m = log[(1 + z) ln(1 + z)] + const.	(4)

δ ∝ (1 + z)α ln(1 + z)−1, with α ≈ 0	(8)

0.13 < a0 c−1H−1 < 0.22	(9)
The cut-off acceleration a0 is the most challenging one of the explananda in Table 3. Its empirical boundaries cor-respond to cH = 6.1 ± 1.5 a0. This should preferably not be a free parameter, which it is in MoND, but emerge from well-founded cosmological considerations, as shown in Section 4.3, in which the relation between gravitation and inertia is crucial.
CM rests on the Galilean principle of inertia, according to which physical objects remain in their state of motion as long as no external force impinges on them. Newton took

their number is conserved, but it becomes practically inap-
plicable if galaxies evolve in luminosity or size with a(t). If they do not, luminosity distance DL is related to angular distance Da as

DL = Da(1 + z)2.	(10)

This would require α = 1 in (8). A violation of the distance-duality relation has been observed between DL(z) of supernovae Ia and Da(z) of radio galaxies, compact radio sources, and X-ray clusters [80]. Analyses of data from galaxy clusters have more recently been reported to be compatible with the relation (10), the elliptical model fitting better than the spherical [81], or vice versa [82]. However, these papers are concerned with the relation between Da(1 + z)2 and DL in (10) and do not report an estimate of the crucial exponent α in the first term of (8). The result of the investigation by Shibuya et al. [60] is sim-ilar to those of previous investigations, which all suggest this exponent to be closer to 0 than to 1, but the difference between 0.05 for the mean −0.10 for the median and −0.26 for the mode is in need of an explanation. A failure to consider the intricate effect of gravitational self-lensing of galaxies on their measured angular sizes may be involved here.
The universality principle suggests that Planck’s radi-ation law, i.e. the Stefan-Boltzmann law and Wien’s dis-placement law, should be valid for sources at any dis-tance. This allows for the surface brightness SB of a red-shifted blackbody a maximum of SB ∝ (1 + z)−4. In the absence of extinction, lensing, and redshift, SB does not change with distance. If there is only a redshift, so that flux accounts for a reduction by (1 + z)−2, the solid angle the object subtends must increase by a factor of (1 + z)2. This condition is satisfied if the distance-duality relation holds, but it is not always evident that it does. In the case of galaxies, there can hardly ever arise a conflict, since their
this as his first law of motion. In CM, rotation and motion in general are considered in an ‘absolute space’ and in ‘absolute time’. Most other philosophers of nature, such as Descartes, Huygens, Leibniz, Berkeley, and, later, Mach [83], were of the opinion that motion can only be specified with respect to actual objects in space.
On his path to GR, it was Einstein’s explicit objective to devise a theory in accord with Mach’s view [84]. However, he actually continued on Newton’s path and consolidated it when he opened for conceiving of motion in a gravita-tional field as inertial motion in a curved space-time. In GR, gravitational and inertial mass are by axiom taken to be the same, i.e. this is asserted without explanation, and space has an even greater role than in CM, although it is now no longer absolute. In CM, space acts on matter, and this goes without a reaction. In GR, there is a reaction: matter curves space, but inertia remains as exceptional as in CM.
Newton’s interpretation of inertia as an effect of space appears to have been the wrong choice that led us into the dark, but in Newton’s time no workable alternative was evident. Since it did not meet any empirical counter-evidence for a long time, it established itself as the accepted standard, but it fails to explain the empirical fact that the inertia of bodies is proportional to their gravi-tational attraction. If a theory of gravitation and inertia is to be well founded, it must offer such an explanation, which neither CM nor GR does. An explanation would be at hand if the inertia of bodies would be, entirely, due to a gravitational effect analogous to electrodynamic induc-tion in response to the relative acceleration of charges. This would be in accordance with Einstein’s [85] concep-tion of Mach’s principle. In this case, inertial forces would decrease when the universe expands and increase in the opposite case. They would also be increased in the vicinity of a gravitating body, where distant bodies appear blue-shifted and, in effect, closer by.

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology  |  13


An attempt to develop a theory in which the inertial force is induced by the relative acceleration of the masses of the universe is due to Sciama [86]. He described a vector theory as a step towards a tensor theory compatible with GR. While he investigated some of the cosmological conse-quences of his theory, he did not devise a cosmology from scratch on the altered premise. He assumed the universe to be expanding, in accordance with the prior interpretation of the cosmic redshift. In attempting to account for inertia on the basis of the density of the universe inferred from astronomical observations, he obtained a missing mass problem of the same magnitude as in GR-based cosmo-logical models, but he expected large amounts of uncon-densed and yet unobserved matter to be present between galaxies.
In order to be tenable and useful at the scale of galax-ies and above, a theory of gravitation and inertia must also explain the dynamics of these. As a phenomenological model, MoND does this only at the most superficial level. It allows predicting the rotation curves of different galax-ies and so can be said to explain the relations between them, but it does it in the absence of an understanding of the underlying physics. The physically founded the-ories proposed so far [32, 33], and also [34], attempt to improve this, but since they introduce an ad hoc force (C = 0) of some kind, they actually lack epistemic value. They are also instances of proceeding on the established path and ‘dreaming up’ something that would make it right. The alternative would be to reconsider the path that was suggested, but not elaborated, by Mach [83] and not
It is noteworthy that, with the exponential expan-sion in (5), (12) describes a Yukawa type of potential that approaches the Newtonian potential (11) at small dis-tances. Fields of this type are also obtained if gravity is screened or ‘absorbed’ in the way imagined by Seeliger [87] and others, as well as in GR-based cosmological perturba-tion theory [88].
In a universe in which matter is homogeneously and isotropically distributed in static space, the potential cor-responding to (12) can be calculated by integrating the contributions from shells of thickness dr at distance r = 0 to ∞:
H	r2
/dr.	(13)
c	z

The contributions to Φ by shells up to r = 8 cH−1 in
(13) are shown in Figure 3 by the continuous line. The inte-grated potential is represented by the area between the abscissa and this line. For r = 0 to ∞, these are 4.80823 times larger than those calculated for a sphere without expansion and rmax = cH−1.
It is commonly claimed that the ordinary baryonic matter accounts for no more than 4.5 % of the criti-cal density, ρc = 3H2(8πG)−1, of a BB universe or a Newtonian Hubble sphere. Actually, only about 0.5 % of ρc is accounted for by matter that can be said to have been ‘observed’ in stars and galactic clouds. The remain-ing 4 % is believed to be present in warm intergalactic

Radius in Hubble length units

fully appreciated by Sciama [86]. This will be pursued in
Section 4.3.

The Gravitational Potential of the Universe
The scalar gravitational potential Φ, which is due to all the masses of the universe, can be calculated for any point in space-time by summing up the contributions from all masses m at their distance r from the point:
Φ = −G ∑︁ m .	(11)
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
–7
–8
–9
–10
–11
–12
–13
0	1	2	3	4	5
6	7	8

In a homogeneous non-expanding universe, this Φ comes out as −∞, which leads to absurdities. However, Φ comes out as finite if the effective r in (11) is not the static distance D but the expanded distance Dexp of (5) and (6). With this distance, we get

Figure 3: Potentials per unit radius in a homogeneous isotropic uni-verse shown as a function of the radial distance (in Hubble length units cH−1) from an observer. Naive contributions to Φ [as if (11) was valid] (dotted line) and those in a cosmology in which (13) is valid (continuous line) are shown. These are less negative by the factor D/Dexp. The dashed line shows the contributions to the equiv-

Φ = −G ∑︁ mH
alent potential Φ
equ
of (15), which are less negative by an additional

14  |  H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


plasma whose estimate ‘is driven by the need to balance the budget rather than more directly by the observations’ [89]. Even if the potential of the universe is 4.8 times larger than that of a Hubble sphere, baryons will still only con-tribute relatively little to the total. The major contributions may come from neutrinos and electromagnetic radiation (photons), whose original energy is not lost as their red-shift progresses, but transmuted into gravitational form. This is briefly discussed in Section 4.4.

Gravity Gradients and Inertia

In GR, a static gravitational force and a force due to uni-form acceleration of a body have been made equivalent, in accordance with Einstein’s [90, 91] equivalence princi-ple, by treating not only inertia but also gravitation as an action of space. One can, alternatively, reason like this:
If the force that acts on a body at rest on Earth is given by a gradient in the gravitational potential field of the Earth, the force that acts similarly on an accelerated body must then be given by a gradient in a field that is present in the comoving frame of the accelerated body.
/

smaller than cH. This can be understood and explained as follows: If everything but a test body accelerates uni-formly in the same direction, the acceleration of a dis-tant mass ‘seen’ by the test body is not ared (which is reduced already at the origin) but its dilated equivalent, a (1 + z)−1, which is seen from a distance. This sug-gests that Milgrom’s a0 reflects the average dilated view of the Hubble acceleration cH. While the gradient that corre-sponds to a (1 + z)−1 is due to interaction with all the distant masses, it can properly be considered to have its origin in the accelerated body. The information propagates through the field from there and not from distant objects that were accelerated billions of years ago.
In order to calculate a0, we have to find the weighted mean value of the factor (1 + z)−1 by which accelera-tions appear reduced from a distance, and to multiply it by cH. The weighting must be proportional to the contri-butions to Φ by each shell, see (13) and the continuous line in Figure 3. The dashed line in the figure shows the so-weighted less negative contributions to an equivalent potential
H ∫︁	r2

/
/	/

as accelerating in the opposite direction and must there-fore give rise to a force in this direction. This force must be counterbalanced in order to accelerate the body. This fairly obvious alternative conception of the equivalence principle implements Mach’s principle immediately.
Under ordinary conditions, the inertial force is F = ma, and a is represented by a gradient. The dynam-ics of galaxies could then possibly be explained if it could be shown that this gradient is reduced disproportionately for accelerations that are not much larger or even smaller than Milgrom’s a0.
The Hubble acceleration cH describes a dilatation (a stretching action) by which the slopes and gradients of
In Figure 3, Φequ is represented by the area between the abscissa and the dashed line. It is found to be smaller than Φ (the area between the abscissa and the contin-uous line, extended to r = ∞) by a factor of 0.168093 (Φ/Φequ = 5.94910). The same result is obtained by calcu-lating the mean r of the distribution shown by the dashed line and finding the value of (1 + z)−1 for this r. We get a0 = 0.168093 cH.
If the inertial force goes towards F = ma at a ≫ a0, and is given by a gradient in the field seen by an acceler-ated body, and slopes are dilated in the way described, the equation for the inertial force becomes

gravitational signals are reduced isotropically. This is an effect that becomes preponderant only at accelerations
F =	ma
+ 0.168093 cH
a
.	(16)

that are still smaller than the small cH. The acceleration ared, which corresponds to a gradient that is reduced by this stretching action, is
a
This reduced inertial force appears to explain the observed non-Newtonian galaxy rotation curves and their successful description by MoND.
Since MoND does not fix the interpolating function

ared =
+ cH .	(14)
a
between the regimes a ≪ a0
and a ≫ a0, several such


If the inertial force that needs to be overcome in order to impart an acceleration a on a body is entirely due to the acceleration of the rest of the universe in the opposite direction, we might, thus, expect this force to be reduced like ared in (14). Observations suggest that there is such a reduction, but that the cut-off acceleration a0 [24] is still
functions have been tried [24, 92]. Equation (16) sin-
gles out the ‘simple’ interpolating function as the valid one, with 1 + a0/a in its denominator. This function was actually reported to give a better fit to empirical data than the ‘standard’ interpolating function, whose prefer-ence derives from the fact that it approaches the New-tonian law more closely at a ≫ a0 [92]. It would require

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology  |  15


[1 + (a0/a)2]1/2 instead of (1 + a0/a) in (16). The two inter-polating functions do not give the same optimal value for a0, which lies in the range of cH/a0 = 6.1 ± 1.5. The value of cH/a0 = 5.94910 implied by (16) falls well within this range. It remains to be investigated how well (16) actually fits observational data.
In distinction from MoND, the present approach is deductive and based on well-founded tenets. While it needs to be reflected on and elaborated more deeply, it requires no ad hoc assumption. It requires just skip-ping Newton’s questionable assumption about the cause of inertia and considering the consequences within the frame of a field theory. If such a non-speculative approach works, it is clear that fundamental progress has been made.
While the validity of (16) does not depend on the composition of the energy content of the universe, the equation needs to be modified in order to capture the effect of a local gravitational time dilation. Gravitational time dilation was predicted [90] already before GR had been elaborated. Nowadays, its existence can be demon-strated directly with precision clocks at different heights in the gravitational field of the Earth. It causes an isotropic blueshift of light that arrives from distant sources. If iner-tia is due to the acceleration of the universe in the rest frame of an accelerated body, the slopes that communicate this acceleration are also ‘blue-shifted’, i.e. they appear steeper. Thereby, the inertial force F is increased. Defining the gravitational blueshift zg in harmony with the cosmic redshift as zg = (fiob – fiem)/fiem, it will be in the range 0 > zg > −1. With this we get
Practical possibilities for checking the validity of (5), (6), (17), and (18) by observations within the Solar System remain to be contemplated.


The Cosmic Energy Cycle

The statistical properties of a persistent universe remain constant over time. This raises a range of important ques-tions to which hardly any attention has been paid before, since they do not arise in a transient universe. If energy is conserved, which is a first principle, the energy that is ‘lost’ as a result of the cosmic redshift must reappear some-where in a cosmic energy cycle [96]. Since this is not so in a transient universe, the topic is never touched in BB cos-mology, while it is of crucial interest if the PCP holds. This principle implies that the universe is in equilibrium and never runs into a ‘heat death’.
Edwards [97] considered the possibility that the energy that is lost by photons while they become redder might remain present in gravitational form and flow into potential wells. From these, the energy would eventually be recycled. The same can be assumed to happen to neu-trinos and gravitational radiation as well. However, this circle is still far from being understood. Since most of the energy emitted by stars appears to be nuclear in origin, a large fraction of the energy that flows into potential wells must there be captured and reconverted into mass. This can happen in neutron stars and in other objects that form similarly deep potential wells. The PCP requires also a cos-mic matter cycle in which as much matter is expelled into space (via pulsar jets, supernovae, quasars, etc.) as falls in

F =	ma
1 + xg
.	(17)
from space onto gravitating bodies.
Stars lose mass when they emit neutrinos and pho-tons. In our scenario, nearly all of the emitted energy,

This increased inertia can be observable in the trajec-
tories of bodies, since it is not balanced by an increased gravitational attraction of masses. It is relevant in analy-ses of the anomaly observed in spacecraft flybys of plan-ets [93, 94]. It prevents any rotating ‘black hole’, in which a source of gravity is surrounded by an event horizon at which 1 + zg = 0, from ever forming. However, even in the absence of any modification, GR does not allow the forma-tion of a horizon or its crossing by a test body to be seen by a distant observer [95]. Black holes are, thus, bound to remain within the fictitious domain outside empirical physics.
The combination of (16) and (17) finally results in

ma
which is equivalent to the lost mass, will gradually be brought into gravitational form when the radiation over-comes the gravity gradient that causes the redshift. This gravitational energy flows into a ‘cosmic ocean’ whose thermal blackbody radiation spectrum defines a floor for the redshift. Since the approach is not in conflict with quantum mechanics, it can be claimed that this ocean is predominantly filled with gravitons, which interact with neutrinos and photons. The gravitons are eventu-ally absorbed in potential wells, which so become deeper unless the effect is balanced (or overridden) by emission of radiation, which makes the wells shallower. Together, the bodies in the universe absorb as much energy, mainly in gravitational form, as they radiate per unit of time, mainly
in form of neutrinos and photons. The 2.725 K of the CMB is

F =
(1 + xg) 1 +
0.168093cH )︁ .	(18)
/
the temperature of the cosmic ocean at which this balance

16  |  H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


is obtained. Given the PCP, this temperature is bound to remain constant.
The CMB photons account for a fraction of 5 × 10−5 of ρc [89]. They must have their origin in starlight, no other choice being offered here. Let us assume that they left the surface of last scattering, on average, at 4360 K, so that they must have been red-shifted by a factor of 1600. In this case, the originally electromagnetic energy that must be present in form of gravitons will be 1599 times higher than that present in form of CMB photons. This would sum up to 8 % of ρc. Further, stars emit about 1.6 times as much energy in form of neutrinos as they emit in form of photons [89], more of the neutrino energy being due to core col-lapse than to nuclear burning. This would, then, already bring us up to the 20.8 % of ρc that appear to be required in a universe in which (13) is valid.
Although a deeper investigation of the energy density of the universe exceeds the scope of this paper, we can already see that gravitons contribute a much larger frac-tion to it than baryons do. Since the presence of these gravitons is hard to verify more directly, the situation is superficially similar to that in concordance cosmology with its Λ and CDM. The crucial difference is that Λ and CDM have been invoked ad hoc (C = 0), as imaginable excuses for certain failures of the BB model, while in the alternative suggested here a similarly large amount of energy is predicted to be present.
The gravity that comes with the energy that fills the universe contributes to the cohesion of galaxy clusters, but massive neutrinos are likely to contribute more [28, 27]. In an infinite universe, there is no shortage of mas-sive neutrinos of low energy, but their fate needs yet to be studied.

Discussion
Although a fully elaborated, more well-founded cosmolog-ical theory remains yet to be presented, a path along which such a theory can be arrived at has been identified in the preceding sections and shown to be easily passable and worthwhile to follow. It leads to a physical cosmology that is more in accord with the ancient world view of Epicurus (ca. 341–270 BC), Lucretius (ca. 99–55 BC), and Giordano Bruno (1548–1600) than with the one arrived at by pro-ceeding on the path indicated by Newton and followed by Einstein. Nature has told us by now that this is the wrong path.
Standard cosmology is not unique in standing falsi-fied. In this, it shares the company of all the advanced models that have been developed during the past 50 years
in theoretical physics [98] (varieties of string theory, super-gravity, supersymmetry, grand unification theory, the exis-tence of D-branes, etc.). All of these were questionable already when proposed.
The non-speculative cosmology that emerges here suggests a Machian alternative to GR. Its predictions devi-ate from those of GR both where gravitation is very weak and where it is very strong, as can be seen in (18). GR will still remain a limiting case of such a more comprehensive theory, to which it points out the way, and Einstein [99] considered this to be the fairest destiny a physical the-ory can have.⁹ However, there is a limit to such develop-ments: the most well-founded theories can no longer be topped in this way, since they will themselves be the most comprehensive ones.
It remains to be checked whether other observables than the most basic ones, listed in Table 3, are compati-ble with the suggested approach. Since the tenets the sug-gested cosmology relies on are of the non-speculative kind (category 2a in Section 2), the reasons for any discrepan-cies must then primarily be searched in possible incon-sistencies, measurement errors, misinterpretations, selec-tion effects, and other missed confounding factors in the analysis of astronomical data. At present, the confound-ing effects of self-lensing of galaxies and galaxy clusters on their angular measures are largely neglected – nearly all studies of lensing being concerned with objects that lie behind galaxies and clusters. Another matter of inter-est towards which attention deserves to be turned consists in the self-regulating properties the universe must have if the PCP holds.
Besides opening a range of new questions, a neo-Epicurean approach like this one also closes many ques-tions, primarily those of cosmogonic and related kind. The phrase ‘the early Universe’ appears in the titles of thou-sands of papers, but this can no longer be a topic in empiri-cal physics. The same holds for all the unpredicted entities in the ‘dark sector’.
The state of physical cosmology at the beginning of the twenty-first century amply demonstrates the unde-sirable lock-in effects of path dependence in science. These impose preconceptions that prevent mainstream researchers from noticing alternatives that otherwise would be obvious. The data that have led to invoking ‘dark energy’ exemplify this. An unprejudiced analysis of these suggests straightforwardly that the redshift factor (1 + z)


9 Es ist das schönste Los einer physikalischen Theorie, wenn sie selbst zur Aufstellung einer umfassenden Theorie den Weg weist, in welcher sie als Grenzfall weiterlebt.

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology  |  17


is a simple exponential function of distance, but this is only told, independently of each other, by researchers who are not on the mainstream path [46–49]. Those on the mainstream path see discrepancies between the empirical data and their expectations, but instead of disputing the traditional tenets that have given rise to the expectations, they stick to the tenets and attribute the discrepancies to dark sector interactions. In textbooks, cosmologists inter-pret such falsifying observations even as tantamount to the discovery of dark matter or dark energy. This is men-tioned by Merritt [31] after a thorough analysis of conven-tionalism in cosmology that corroborates my own critical view.¹⁰
The perseverance of preconceptions that were inher-ited from prior theories, but which at a subsequent stage in development could be recognised as inadequate if the liberal introduction of ad hoc hypotheses was avoided, reveals a lack of awareness of the confidence problem addressed in Section 2. The confidence check suggested there is called for in the definition of empirical science as a pursuit of reliable statements. It requires, above all, to sin-gle out ad hoc assumptions (2c in Section 2), but it requires also distinguishing between merely tentative assumptions (2b) and those which appear reliable at the state of our knowledge (2a). Scientists often accept the tenets of estab-lished theories without reflecting about their reliability at all. Philosophers of science rather image all assumptions as fallible without distinction. Some even reject the pur-suit of objective observations, claiming that all observa-tion is necessarily prejudiced, since it depends on assump-tions. None of these attitudes is suited to promote sci-ence fundamentally. Assumptions can be well-founded, and these must not be dismissed – in distinction from those that do not pass the confidence check.
In addition to checking the confidence we can have in
any tenets, a customary consistency check of the reason-ing is called for. The reasoning should be free from con-ceptual, logical, and mathematical errors and from crucial lacunae. The inattentive treatment of comparison stan-dards, which has given rise to the delimitation problem in BB cosmologies and which also appears to be a result of path dependence, shows that, once established as a custom, even such deficiencies can be passed on.
The drawbacks of path dependence show them-selves also in the activity of innovators. Sciama [86] still treated GR and the expansion of the universe as given, although the idea he investigated, inertial induction, has


10 When writing previous versions of this paper, I had not yet seen [31].
consequences that speak against both. Later, among the two alternatives to MoND, namely modified gravitation and modified inertia, only one was pursued. It was the one that can be realised by keeping CM or GR and adding a new field to them ad hoc [32, 33] – not the one that would call the foundation of both theories into question (modi-fied inertia). Scientific journals often publish speculative papers, such as of the first-mentioned kind, while any paper that more directly discredits the currently accepted doctrine within their field runs a very high risk of being rejected by referees. These can easily identify deviations from established doctrine and practice, while it requires a higher effort and self-conquest to follow and evaluate a path of reasoning that deviates from the one one is accus-tomed to. Together with the similar disposition by teach-ers and grant-providers, this leads to the perseverance of aberrations from the path to reliable knowledge in what Kuhn [3] called ‘normal science’ and Lakatos [6] ‘research programmes’. The analyses by both philosophers describe actual mainstream research activity adequately, but the activities so labeled just widen our knowledge – they can-not lead to any fundamental improvement in our under-standing of nature.


Acknowledgements: Thanks are due to five anonymous reviewers for their detailed, stimulating, and/or illumi-native comments on previous versions of this polemical paper.

References
K. Popper, Logik der Forschung: zur Erkenntnistheorie der modernen Naturwissenschaft [The Logic of Scientific Discovery], Julius Springer, Wien 1935.
P. A. David, Am. Econ. Rev. 75, 332 (1985).
T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1962.
A. Jolink and J. Vromen, in: Evolution and Path Dependence in Economic Ideas (Eds. P. Garrouste, S. Ioannides), Elgar, Cheltenham 2001, p. 205.
M. S. Peacock, Soc. Epistemol. 23, 105 (2009).
I. Lakatos, in: Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge (Eds. I. Lakatos, A. Musgrave), Cambridge University Press, London 1976, p. 170.
E. L. Gettier, Analysis 23, 121 (1963).
J. Baggott, Farewell to Reality: How Modern Physics Has Betrayed the Search for Scientific Truth, Pegasus Books, New York 2013.
H. Bondi and T. Gold, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 108, 252 (1948).
A. Einstein, K. Sitzungsber, Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Phys.-Math. Klasse VI, 142 (1917).
G. Lemaître, Ann. Soc. Sci. Brux. 47, 49 (1927).

18 | H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology


R. C. Tolman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 16, 511 (1930).
B. Leibundgut, R. Schommer, M. Phillips, A. Riess, B. Schmidt, et al., Astrophys. J. Lett. 466, L21 (1996).
G. Goldhaber, S. Deustra, S. Gabi, D. Groom, I. Hook, et al., in: Thermonuclear Supernovae (Eds. P. Ruiz-Lapuente, R. Canal, J. Isern), Kluwer, Dordrecht 1997, p. 777.
A. G. Riess, A. V. Filippenko, D. C. Leonard, B. P. Schmidt, N. Suntzeff, et al., Astron. J. 114, 722 (1997).
S. Perlmutter, G. Aldering, M. Della Valle, S. Deustua, R. S. Ellis, et al., Nature 391, 51 (1998).
V. Filippenko and A. G. Riess, Phys Rep. 307, 31 (1998).
G. Goldhaber, D. E. Groom, A. Kim, G. Aldering, P. Astier, Astrophys. J. 558, 395 (2001).
R. J. Foley, A. V. Filippenko, D. C. Leonard, A. G. Riess, P. Nugent, et al., Astrophys. J. 626, L11 (2005).
S. Blondin, T. M. Davis, K. Krisciunas, B. P. Schmidt, J. Sollerman, et al., Astrophys. J. 682, 724 (2008).
F. Zwicky, Helv. Phys. Acta 6, 110 (1933).
F. Zwicky, Astrophys. J. 86, 217 (1937).
V. Rubin, W. K. Ford Jr., and N. Thonnard, Astrophys. J. 238, 471 (1980).
M. Milgrom, Astrophys. J. 270, 365 (1983).
B. Famaey and S. McGaugh, Living Rev. Relativ. 15, 10 (2012).
M. Milgrom and R. H. Sanders, Astrophys. J. 658, L17 (2007).
R. A. Swaters, R. H. Sanders, and S. S. McGaugh, Astrophys. J.
718, 380 (2010).
R. H. Sanders, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 342, 901 (2003).
S. S. McGaugh, Astrophys. J. 609, 652 (2004).
S. Trippe, Z. Naturforsch. 69a, 173 (2014).
D. Merritt, Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. 57, 41 (2017).
M. Milgrom, New Astron. Rev. 46, 741 (2002).
D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 70, 083509 (2004).
J. W. Moffat, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. (2005). DOI 10.1088/1475-7516/2005/05/003
A. H. Guth, Phys. Rev. D 23, 347 (1981).
A. H. Guth, D. I. Kaiser, and Y. Nomura, Phys. Lett. B. 733, 112 (2014).
A. Starobinsky, Phys. Lett. B 91, 99 (1980).
A. Ijjas, P. J. Steinhardt, and A. Loeb, Phys. Lett. B. 736, 142 (2014).
V. F. Mukhanov, Phys. Uspekhi 59, 1021 (2016).
P. Steinhardt and N. Turok, Science 296, 1436 (2002).
A. G. Riess, A. V. Filippenko, P. Challis, A. Clocchiatti, A. Diercks, et al., Astron. J. 116, 1009 (1998).
P. E. J. Peebles and B. Ratra, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 559 (2003).
R. R. Caldwell, R. Dave, and P. J. Steinhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett.
80, 1582 (1998).
O. Lahav and M. Massimi, Astron. Geophys. 55, 3.12 (2014).
R. L. Mößbauer, in: Proceedings of the Fourth SFB-375 Ring-berg Workshop łNeutrino Astrophysics”, 1998. Available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/astro-ph/9801320.pdf#page=11 [accessed 9 March 2017].
H. Traunmüller, Astrophys. Space Sci. 350, 755 (2014).
P. Ostermann, Conference contribution, DPG 2007, GR-205.2. Available at: http://www.peter-ostermann.de/assets/07a.pdf [accessed 9 March 2017].
J.-M. Vigoureux, P. Vigoureux, and B. Vigoureux, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 47, 928 (2008).
A. Marosi, J. Mod. Phys. 5, 29 (2014).
H. Wei, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. (2010). DOI 10.1088/1475-7516/2010/08/020
R. Sandage, in: Observational Cosmology; Proceedings of the IAU Symposium, Beijing, People’s Republic of China, August 25–30, 1986 (A88-29629 11–90), D. Rei-
del Publishing Co., Dordrecht 1987, p. 1. Available at: http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1987IAUS..124.	1S.
[accessed 13 August 2018].
R. Sandage, Astrophys. J. 173, 485 (1972).
S. Djorgovski and H. Spinrad, Astrophys. J. 251, 417 (1981).
M. López-Corredoira, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 19, 245 (2010).
R. J. Bouwens, G. D. Illingworth, J. P. Blakeslee, T. J. Broadhurst, and M. Franx, Astrophys. J. 611, L1 (2004).
A. van der Wel, H.-W. Rix, S. Wuyts, E. J. McGrath, A. M. Koekemoer, et al., Astrophys. J. 688, 48 (2008).
B. W. Holwerda, R. Bouwens, P. Oesch, R. Smit, G. Illingworth, et al., Astrophys. J. 808, 6 (2014).
M. Mosleh, R. J. Williams, M. Franx, V. Gonzalez, R. J. Bouwens, et al., Astrophys. J. Lett. 756, L12 (2012).
M. J. Disney, J. D. Romano, D. A. Garcia–Appadoo, A. A. West, J.
J. Dalcanton, et al., Nature 455, 1082 (2008).
T. Shibuya, M. Ouchi, and Y. Harikane, Astrophys. J. Suppl.
219, 15 (2015).
A. Kashlinsky, F. Atrio-Barandela, D. Kocevski, and H. Ebeling, Astrophys. J. Lett. 686, L49 (2008).
R. Watkins, H. A. Feldman, and M. J. Hudson, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 392, 743 (2009).
G. R. Farrar and R. A. Rosen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 171302 (2007).
M. Harwit, Astrophysical Concepts, 4th ed., Springer Science & Business Media, New York, 2006, p. 572.
D. Giulini, Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. 46, 24 (2014).
S. K. Arora, Metric Contraction: An Alternate Model for Cosmol-ogy, 2015. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/19745143/ [accessed 8 March 2017].
C. Wetterich, Nucl. Phys. B 897, 111 (2015).
G. A. Krasinsky and V. A. Brumberg, Celest. Mech. Dyn. Astron.
90, 267 (2004).
L. Iorio, Astron. J. 142, 68 (2011).
V. Pitjeva and N. P. Pitjev, Solar Syst. Res. 46, 78 (2012).
M. Křížek and L. Somer, Int. J. Astron. Astrophys. 3, 227 (2013).
J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. Martin Nieto, et al., Phys. Rev. D 65, 082004 (2002).
S. G. Turyshev and V. T. Toth, Living Rev. Relativ. 13, 4 (2010).
S. G. Turyshev, V. T. Toth, G. Kinsella, S.-C. Lee, S. M. Lok, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 241101 (2012).
A. Unzicker and D. Schmidle, A Quick and Dirty Approach to Verify the Pioneer Anomaly, 2007. Available at:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/gr-qc/0702151.pdf [accessed 9 March 2017].
Yu. V. Baryshev, F. S. Labini, M. Mantuori, L. Pietronero, and P. Teerikorpi, Fractals 6, 231 (1998).
J. Masreliez, Apeiron 11, 99 (2004).
W. de Sitter, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 78, 3 (1917).
M. H. Etherington, Philos. Mag. 15, 761 (1933).
A. Bassett and M. Kunz, Phys. Rev. D 69, 101305(R) (2004).
R. F. L. Holanda, J. A. S. Lima, and M. B. Ribeiro, Astron. Astrophys. 528, L14 (2011).

H. Traunmüller: Towards a More Well-Founded Cosmology  |  19


X. Yang, H.-R. Yu, Z.-S. Zhang, and T.-J. Zhang, Astrophys. J.
777, L24 (2013).
E. Mach, Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung historisch-kritisch dargestellt [The Science of Mechanics – A Critical and Histor-ical Account of its Development], 2nd ed., Brockhaus, Leipzig 1889.
C. Hoefer, Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. A 25, 287 (1994).
A. Einstein, Vierteljahrschrift gerichtliche Medizin öffentliches Sanitätswesen 44, 37 (1912).
W. Sciama, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 113, 34 (1953).
H. Seeliger, Astron. Nachr. 137, 129 (1895).
M. Eingorn, C. Kiefer, and A. Zhuk, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 26, 1743012 (2017).
M. Fukugita and P. J. E. Peebles, Astrophys. J. 616, 643 (2004).
A. Einstein, Jahrbuch Radioaktivität Elektronik 4, 411,
esp. 454–462 (1907).
A. Einstein, Ann. Phys. 35, 898 (1911).
B. Famaey, G. Gentile, J.-P. Bruneton, and H. S. Zhao, Phys. Rev. D 75, 063002 (2007).
D. Anderson, J. K. Campbell, J. E. Ekelund, J. Ellis, and J. F. Jordan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 091102 (2008).
L. Acedo, P. Piqueras, and J. A. Moraño, A Possible Flyby Anomaly for Juno at Jupiter, 2017. Available at:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1711.08893.pdf [accessed 28 March 2018].
V. Baccetti, R. Mann, and D. R. Terno, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 26, 1743008 (2017).
R. Edwards, Apeiron 5, 157 (1998).
R. Edwards, Astrophys. Space Sci. 339, 13 (2012).
J. Hauser and W. Dröscher, Z. Naturforsch. 72a, 493 (2017).
A. Einstein, Über die spezielle und die allgemeine Relativitäts-theorie, Vieweg, Braunschweig 1917.



Towards the Unification of Gravity and other Interactions: What has been Missed?
M. Pavˇsiˇc
Joˇzef Stefan Institute, Jamova 39, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia; E-mail: matej.pavsic@ijs.si



ABSTRACT
Faced with the persisting problem of the unification of gravity with other fundamental interactions we investigate the possibility of a new paradigm, according to which the basic space of physics is a multidimensional space C associated with matter configurations. We consider general relativity in C. In spacetime, which is a 4-dimensional subspace of C, we have not only the 4-dimensional gravity, but also other interactions, just as in Kaluza-Klein theories. We then consider a finite dimensional description of extended objects in terms of the center of mass, area, and volume degrees of freedom, which altogether form a 16-dimensional manifold whose tangent space at any point is Clifford algebra Cl(1,3). The latter algebra is very promising for the unification, and it provides description of fermions.



Introduction
Our current physical theories are mostly formulated in terms of spacetime, a 4-dimensional manifold whose points correspond to ‘events’ associated with, e.g., collisions of particles. General relativity is based on the concept of curved spacetime which enables descrip-tion of gravity. One possible generalization is to consider higher dimensional spacetimes which, besides 4D gravity, include other fundamental interactions. Another possible gen-eralization is to assume that fundamental objects are not point particles but strings, whose excitations contain fundamental particles and interactions. Though very promis-ing, those theories have encountered numerous difficulties, and currently we still do not have a generally accepted ‘unified theory’.
When considering extended objects, there is a possibility of formulating the theory in terms of the corresponding configuration space. Such idea has been considered before in numerous illuminating works by Barbour [1]. For some other approaches see refs. [2]. Here I will adopt the view that general relativity should be extended to configuration

space C, a multidimensional manifold equipped with metric, connection and curvature. In this picture a 4-dimensional spacetime is just a subspace of C, associated with the degrees of freedom of a single point particle. In order to describe not only 4D gravity, but also other interactions, we can employ the extra dimensions of C.

Generalizing relativity
Configuration space replaces spacetime
Let us consider a system of point particles whose coordinates are Xµ, where µ = 0, 1, 2, 3, i = 1, 2, ..., N , N being the number of particles in the configuration. We can consider Xµ as coordinates in a 4 × N -dimensional configuration space C, therefore it is convenient to introduce a more compact notation:
˙ µ ≡ X˙ (iµ) ≡ X˙ M ,	M = (iµ)	(1)
Let us assume that the action for such system is
I[XM ] = M ∫ dτ [X˙ M X˙ N GMN (XM )]1/2	(2)

which is proportional to the length of a worldline in C. Constant1 M has the role of mass
in C, whereas τ is an arbitrary monotonically increasing parameter.
An action which is equivalent to (2) is the Schild action
I[XM ] = ∫ dτ X˙ M X˙ N MK GMN (XM )	(3)
From the equations of motion derived from (3) it follows that
X˙ M X˙ M GMN = K2	(4)
Therefore (3) is a gauge fixed form of the action (2).
We will assume that configuration space C is a manifold equipped with metric GMN , connection and curvature (that in general does not vanish).
In particular, for the block diagonal metric
	
GMN ≡ G(iµ)(jν) = g(iµ)(jν) =	(5)
	

the action (3) becomes
I[X˙ µ] = ∫ dτ Σ X˙ µX˙ ν M g	(Xµ)	(6)


1Symbol M , of course, has a different meaning when occurring as an index.

Rewriting eq. (4) as

˙ 2	X˙ 2
  1 = 1 −   2
K2	K2

X˙ 2
—   3
K2

X˙ 2
— ... −  N
K2

(7)

and introducing a new constant m2 ≡ p2 = M 2 − p2 − p2 − ... − p2 , we find

1	1
M 2	m2
2	3	N
M	m1

  1
/	/
2	2	k1
(8)

Here k2 = X2 = gµνX˙ µX˙ ν , and p2 ≡ pµpνgµν. Since the above derivation can be repeated
i	i	i	i	i	i  i

for any i = 1, 2, ..., N , we have
M = mi K	ki

(9)

Inserting the latter relation into the action (6) we obtain the Schild action for a system of relativistic particles moving in a gravitational field gµν , in fact the sum of Schild action for individual particles. Thus the ordinary relativistic theory for a many particle system is just a special case of the general action (2) or (3) for a particular, block diagonal metric (5).
By allowing for a more general metric, that cannot be transformed into the form (5) by a choice of coordinates in C, we go beyond the ordinary theory.
Configuration space C is the space of possible “instantaneous” configurations in M4. Its points are described by coordinates xM ≡ xµ. A given configuration traces a worldline
xM = XM (τ ) in C.
A dynamically possible worldline in C is a geodesic in C, and it satisfies the variation principle based on the action (2).
Instead of considering a fixed metric of C, let us assume that the metric GMN is dynamical, so that the total action contains a kinetic term for GMN :
I[XM , GMN ] = Im + Ig	(10)
where
Im =	dτ M (GMN X˙ M X˙ N )(1/2) =	dτ M (GMN X˙ M X˙ N )(1/2) δD (x − X(τ )) dDx
(11)

and
1
Ig =
16πGD
∫ dDx √|G| R	(12)

Here R is the curvature scalar in C. So we have general relativity in configuration space
C. We have arrived at a theory which is analogous to Kaluza-Klein theory. Configuration space is a higher dimensional space, whereas spacetime M4 is a 4-dimensional subspace of C, associated with a chosen particle.
The concept of configuration space can be used either in macrophysics or in micro-physics. Configuration space associated with a system of point particles is finite dimen-sional. Later we will discuss infinite dimensional configuration spaces associated with strings and branes.

Equations of motion for a configuration of point particles
The equations of motion derived from the action (10) are the Einstein equations in config-uration space C. Let us now split the coordinates of C into 4-coordinates Xµ ≡ X1µ , µ = 0, 1, 2, 3 associated with position of a chosen particle, labeled by 1, and the remaining co-ordinates XM¯ :
XM = (Xµ, XM¯ )	(13)
The quadratic form occurring in the action (2) can then be split—according to the well known procedure of Kaluza-Klein theories—into a 4-dimensional part plus the part due to the extra dimensions of configuration space C:
X˙ M X˙ N GMN = X˙ µX˙ νgµν + extra terms	(14)
More precisely, if for the metric of C we take the ansatz

  g	+ AM¯ AN¯ φ ¯ ¯ ,	AN¯ φ ¯ ¯
AN φM¯ N¯ ,	φM¯ N¯

then we obtain

X˙ M X˙ N G	= X˙ µX˙ νg	+ X˙ ¯ X˙ ¯ φM¯ N¯
(16)

MN	µν	M	N
where

¯
X˙ M¯ = GM¯ N X˙ N = AM¯ µX˙ µ + φ ¯ ¯ X˙ N
(17)

Inserting expression (16) into the action (11), we have
I [Xµ, XM¯ ] = M ∫ dτ hX˙ µX˙ νg	+ φM¯ N¯ (A	X˙ µ + φ	X˙ J¯)(A	X˙ ν + φ	X˙ K¯ )i1/2

m	µν
M¯ µ
M¯ J¯
N¯ ν
N¯ K¯

(18)

Let us now assume that the “internal” subspace of C admits isometries given by the Killing vector fields kJ¯. Index α runs over the independent Killing vectors, whereas J¯,
like M¯ , N¯ , runs over the “internal” coordinates. Then, as it is customary in Kaluza-Klein

theories, we write

AJ¯ = kJ¯Aα

(19)

µ	α  µ
The metric φM¯ N¯ of the internal space can be rewritten in terms of a metric ϕαβ in the

space of isometries:

φM¯ N¯ = ϕαβkM¯ kN¯ + φM¯ N¯

(20)

α	β	extra

M¯ N¯ extra
are additional terms due to the directions that are orthogonal to ismotries.

For particular internal spaces C¯, those additional terms may vanish.
The projections of momenta onto Killing vectors are


p	≡ kJ¯P ¯
(21)

α	α J
We may chose a coordinate system in C in which
kM =  kµ, kM¯  , kµ = 0,	kM¯ /= 0	(22)

Variation of the action (18 gives [3]
1 d   X˙ µ !

/

/	/





(4)

µ X˙ ρX˙ σ
/




pα	α


X˙ ν

/

/


+  1   ϕαβ − ϕαβ kJ¯ Aα′  p p
 1  dm
+	= 0	(23)

′
2m2	,µ	,J¯	α	µ	α β	λm dτ
where λ = X˙ µX˙ ν gµν 1/2.
In the above derivation we have used the following relation between the 4-dimensional and the higher dimensional mass


m	X˙ µXνgµν
=
!1/2

(24)

M	X˙ M X˙ N GMN
which, for the special case of the block diagonal metric GMN has been already given in eq. (8).
From eq. (23), in which pα have the role of gauge charges, we see that m has the role of inertial mass in 4-dimensions. The 4-dimensional mass m is given by higher dimensional mass M and the contribution due to the extra components of momentum PM¯ :

m2 = gµνp p	= M 2 − φM¯ N¯ p ¯ p ¯ = M 2 − ϕαβ p p
(25)

µ ν	M  N	α β
These extra components PM¯ are in fact momenta of all other particles within the configu-
ration. In general m is not constant, but in configuration spaces with suitable isometries it may be constant. In the last step in eq. (25), for simplicity, we have considered the case in which the terms with φM¯ N¯ , occurring in eq. (20),