Keating 1972). This experiment also confirmed Lorentz time dilation with velocity. A more recent experiment has confirmed differences in time dilation even with minute changes in height (Redmond 2022). The “Waves of Space” model would expect the same dilation on the basis of deletion of space already traversed by the parts of any clock or other timing device, similar to the time dilation of the Lorentz transformations (see 6.3 and 6.4).

General relativity also predicts gravitational bending of light (Hirvonen 2025-b). The current model predicts a similar bending effect, on the basis of space deletion (see 5.1). Newton himself had predicted the attraction of light by gravity similarly to mass, in 1704 in a brief note without elaboration (Shapiro & Shapiro 2010).

The bending of light wave fronts moving horizontally past a planet or star is analogous to refraction. The closer portions of that wave front move slower than the farther portions, as if it had entered a material medium with an index of refraction greater than one. Unlike refraction in physical media, in which there is variation of indices of refraction for different frequencies, there is no separation of colors as light is bent by gravity in space.

6.6 Challenges to Relativity Theories


Although there was vigorous opposition and debate when each of the relativity theories came out, they have since achieved widespread acceptance among physicists. Some are now saying, though, that general relativity has lasted over a century, but will not be our final theory of gravity, in part because it is not compatible with quantum theory (Wolfram 2015). There are still small bastions of dissent, including the journal Galilean Electrodynamics (https://www.galilean-
electrodynamics.com/home), and supporters of the Absolute Theory of Relativity (ATR). As

described by ATR’s apparent chief theorist, Florentin Smarandache (2012):


“While Einstein considered a relative space and relative time but the ultimate speed of light, we did the opposite: we considered an absolute time and absolute space but no ultimate speed, and we called it the Absolute Theory of Relativity (ATR). ATR has no time dilation, no length contraction, no relativistic simultaneities, and no relativistic paradoxes…We don’t use

Minkowski spacetime since we consider it as artificial, imaginary…Einstein did not prove that the speed of light cannot be surpassed, he only postulated it. Therefore we have the right to question this.”

Marmet (2001) identified a fundamental limitation of relativity theories, posing an obstacle in uniting relativity theories with quantum mechanics:

“There exists no physical rationalization explaining why and how matter can dilate or contract as claimed in relativity. That physics theory is impenetrable, because it is not compatible with the existence of an absolute physical reality, independent of the observer. Einstein's theory has never been able to provide a logical description of the physical meaning of relativity. Unfortunately, just as during the Middle Ages, most scientists claim that nature is not compatible with conventional logic. Magic is required in the interpretation of Einstein's relativity.”

The “Waves of Space” model, in contrast, accepts many essential findings of special relativity, including length contraction and time dilation at rapid speeds as well as in powerful gravitational fields, and expects the same results. However, it attributes both to different mechanisms, each resulting in increased space deletion (see 6.2 and 6.4). Gravitational bending of light and slowing of clocks are similarly accepted as logical results of space deletion by gravity. Space expansion is attributed to space addition, not a “cosmological constant” (see 3.2 and 4.4).

The model is inconsistent with relativity theories in several respects. These include arguments that shrinkage of matter in size or length should have mechanisms explaining what happens to the units and function of the matter, and that singularities cannot exist (see 2.6 and 6.1). Also, that motion

and variations in size are “real,” even though detected and measured relatively (see 9.4). Further, that the gravitational field of a moving body should be unevenly distributed (see 6.3), greater toward the front where more concentrated space deletion is expected, and less toward the rear. If the latter is true, it might be an exception to the equivalence of gravitational and inertial mass. Four-dimensional spacetime becomes optional in the model (see 9.2).

DO WE NEED PARTICLES WHEN WE HAVE WAVES?


In Section 6, we considered some implications of the “Waves of Space” model for special and general relativity, looking especially at how the local gravitational field of a rapidly moving body with the wave quality of mass might cause the Lorentz transformations and the increase in inertia. Now, we shall move on to consider the question of whether particles exist or are actually waves, first for light and then for matter. A major cause of complexity and confusion in physics is the intuitive and philosophical belief in particles, with empty space between them. This ancient concept of “atoms and the void” has persisted since the age of Democritus (Berryman 2022). John Dalton reinforced it with his atomic theory over two centuries ago (Barlow 2017). Modern humans retain the concept of particles, probably because it corresponds to our every-day subjective experience of solid physical matter.

Light Is Made of Waves and Does Not Require Particles; Hypothesis on Electromagnetism


This subsection takes on the issue of whether light requires particles. The term light will apply to all frequencies of electromagnetic radiation. The next subsection will question whether matter requires particles.

Newton and Einstein preferred to think of light as made up of particles, but the wave theory of light, first expressed by Christiaan Huygens in 1690, has more evidence. Thomas Young in 1803 showed that when a beam of light is fired such that it goes through two slits, the photographic images show interference that can only be explained by wave interaction (Ananthaswamy 2023).

None of the particle-like properties of light rule out causation by waves in space. John D. Norton (2022, February) explained particle-like properties in terms of “wave packets” rather than particulate photons. An allegedly particle-like property of light is that the energy levels of electron orbits around atomic nuclei occur in roughly discrete quantities, emitting a photon of light energy at an appropriate frequency when an electron drops to a lower orbital, and absorbing one photon (at the cost of its annihilation) at an appropriate frequency when the electron enters a higher orbital.
However, this property too is based on the energy levels of the electrons, and not on particle-like properties of light.

There is no discrete segment of a light wave (such as a certain number of wave lengths) that defines a photon. A light wave is a continuum. This is a powerful indication that light itself as it travels freely through space is not inherently quantized or otherwise defined into units. Photons instead are determined and defined by the absorption and emission of quantized amounts of light energy by atoms. This contradicts a 1905 article by Einstein, claiming that the total energy of a beam of light was quantized (Styer 1999), When a light wave of an appropriate frequency encounters an atom, the atom can utilize “just enough” of its energy to raise an electron to a standing wave in a higher orbital, or to let it escape altogether from the atom. The “just enough” quantity of light energy is called a photon, which remains a wave throughout and has no need to be considered as a particle.

Conversely, an electron can drop to a standing wave in a lower orbital, and emit “just enough” light at an appropriate frequency to account for the energy difference, as in blackbody radiation (Nelaturu & Wooding 2023). The fact that a photon is not really a unit of light, let alone a particle, but rather a measure of the use of light energy to move electrons between orbitals is not often discussed in physics literature.

An atom contains a hierarchy of electron “shells” and orbitals, each with a greater and discrete energy level. In physics as in astronomy, more distant orbits require higher energy than closer ones, and this is true for electrons around nuclei as well as for satellites around the earth. Only certain energy levels are permitted, and the number of electrons in each “shell” is known to be 2n2,,with n being the “shell” number counting from closest to the nucleus. Orbitals labelled s, p, d, and f are added to accommodate the permitted electron energy levels within a “shell” that has multiple electrons (Vitz et al. 2024).

The suggestion here is that this may be because all electrons in orbitals are situated where each electron within them can form such a standing wave, with the shapes of these waves varying by orbital (e.g., circular vs. dumbbell or clover-leaf shaped), but all connected end-to-end (Vitz et al.
2024, LaFreniére 2009). In standing waves on circular or equivalent paths with connected ends, the initial and final points are coincident, and the path’s circumference must be a multiple of the wave length, so that nodes remain undisturbed (Riggs 2021). This can only be achieved by specific wave lengths in orbitals with specific circumferences. Higher-frequency light waves with short wave lengths provide the extra energy to form standing waves at higher-energy orbitals, and lower-frequency light waves do the same for lower-energy orbitals. Black bodies also emit more high-frequency waves at higher temperatures, although not exclusively.

With respect to interactions with electrons, higher-frequency light can therefore be considered to be associated with higher energy, but this has more to do with resonating frequencies than with the total energy of the light. Certain near-infrared frequencies are not energetic enough to move electrons, but they resonate with the frequencies of chemical bonds and can thereby vibrate molecules. The energy of individual light waves is mostly determined by their amplitude. Both frequency and amplitude, and in beams of light also concentration of waves, determine energy density. The relationships among these factors will be further discussed in connection with entropy (see 10.3).

Electrical and magnetic fields are uniquely different from anything else in physics, and rather mystifying in terms of mechanisms. This is not a treatise on electromagnetism, but a few key aspects will be reviewed as examples of this uniqueness. James Maxwell summarized equations that describe most electrical and magnetic phenomena effectively, and apply to all frequencies of electromagnetic radiation, but neither he nor anyone since has supplied an explanation as to why they work (Paschos 2007).

Electromagnetic waves are often described as transverse, with oscillating electrical and magnetic fields perpendicular to each other, propagating at the speed of light. This makes them electromagnetic even though the waves themselves do not carry a charge (Bhattacharjee 2022). In the present model, the fields are volumes of space that conduct the waves but do not create them.

Unique aspects of electromagnetism include that currents of electrons are induced when magnets are moved, and that magnetism is induced by moving charges. Electrical charges can be unipolar, but only dipoles occur with magnetism. For both electrical and magnetic charges, there is attraction, but also repulsion and polarity, and both extend out into space, decreasing with the square

of distance from the center of the electrical or magnetic charge (Elert 2024). The attraction and the inverse square relationship of concentration with distance are similar to gravity, but other features including repulsion and polarity are not. Space deletion, proposed to be the cause of gravity in the current model, does not appear to be involved, because these fields have no effect on gravitational fields and vice versa.

All of the features of electromagnetism are rooted in the electrical charges of electrons and protons, which in the current model are properties of matter waves. In three metals considered ferromagnetic (iron, nickel, and cobalt), atoms can directionally align their positive and negative charges, which makes them magnetic, always with two poles (Ghalayini & Vaupel 2017). The impossibility of magnetic monopoles is not surprising, because the atoms thus aligned always have both types of charges due to their electrons and protons. Magnetic phenomena would be due to the wave interactions of the charges issuing from the positive and negative sides of the ferromagnetic materials with aligned atoms.

In a common lab exercise, iron filings scattered near a magnet form lines as they stimulate each other to align atoms and pass on temporary magnetism, while also curving toward the opposite pole. This does not mean that there are actual lines of force. If the waves that influence atomic alignments are self-duplicating, each temporarily magnetized iron filing should in turn temporarily magnetize the next.

An unsupported speculation related to attraction, repulsion, and polarity is that the matter waves (not the electromagnetic waves) associated with electrical charges occur in two opposing wave configurations, with opposite phases. One configuration could theoretically be associated with

positive charge, the other with negative charge. Superposition of two waves with the same frequencies and amplitudes but completely out of phase should cause perfect destructive interference. If cancelled waves could allow the next adjacent waves to approach each other, there could be less space between the adjacent waves and hence electromagnetic attraction would occur. Superposition of wave configurations of the same charge (in phase) would produce constructive interference with enhancement of amplitude. If this could increase the space between the next adjacent waves, electromagnetic repulsion could occur. Unfortunately for that speculation, known wave superpositions involve destructive or constructive wave interference of amplitude but not of distance (Bryant 2006). The interaction of matter waves in relation to electrical charges is suggested as an area for research.

Matter is also Made of Waves and Does Not Require Particles


The concept of particles is intuitive but misleading. The impression that there are solid objects is difficult for humans to think beyond. It may be the most difficult conceptual barrier in getting past the concept of particles. Gaseous and liquid states of matter are less difficult to associate with the concept of waves (even though they can have impacts on our bodies from their momentum), but the solid state is different. When we hit a vehicle, a wall, or a floor, there is a sudden hard sensation from the impact, and damage can be done.

In physics, solidity is consistent with some of the phenomena in mechanics theory, but it is more difficult to reconcile with atomic and subatomic physics theory, in which particles are not really solid or compact at all. If an atom had particles, they would not take up much of its volume, because an estimated 99.9999999% is thought to space not occupied by particles (Sundermier 2016). In

quantum theory, wave functions would fill much of the space, and the interpretation of the model would be that “volons” would fill the entire volume, and that those involved in standing matter waves would bounce among them.

Not only light, but also particles are said to have wave properties as well as particle properties. Louis De Broglie in 1923-24 proposed a wave form for each particle of matter, similar to light, with the relationship of momentum=(Planck’s constant)/wavelength. Since experiments in 1925-27, it has been known that interference patterns through slits, similar to those with light, occur with beams of electrons (Hosch 2006, and have also been found with protons, neutrons, and helium nuclei (College Sidekick 2024). Thus, both light and matter act as waves.

According to Gabriel LaFreniére (2009), De Broglie proposed that matter mechanics be renamed as “wave mechanics.” LaFreniére declared that matter and energy are entirely made of waves, and attempted to characterize some of these waves graphically.

Two or more waves impacting upon one another can produce new waves. It seems considerably more difficult to conceive of how particles can break apart in such a way that their components have exactly the right contents to recombine into other known types of particles.
Mechanisms for such particle reconstruction seem to be lacking. In contrast, as noted by Norton (2022, February), waves can break apart and re-combine, and their energy can be modified by changes in amplitude or increased emission. Norton further stated that ”quantum theory demands that we get some of the properties of classical particles back into the waves.” Waves in general have more capabilities than particles, including degrees of freedom, and therefore more potential to explain all the properties of matter and energy. The breaking and recombination of waves probably involves

tiny fractions of a second for transitional wave forms, which if they resonate can be mistaken for separate particles.

Hobson has understood this, though he has described the wave medium as fields rather than space. He published an article (2013) entitled “There are no particles, there are only fields.” In a follow-up book (2017), he declared that “Reality is made of waves in unseen fields. Quanta such as photons, electrons, atoms, and molecules are not “things. They are, instead, waves in fields, much as water ripples on a pond are waves in water.” He noted that at high energies, most quantum field theorists (see 8.2) agree that relativistic quantum physics is about fields, and that electrons, photos, etc. are merely waves (excitations) in the fundamental fields. Nevertheless, he noted, at low energy levels, “both non-relativistic quantum physics education and popular talk is about particles.”

When Natalie Wolchover (2020, November) asked 12 particle physicists to define a particle, she got a different answer from each. Some of the interesting responses were “a quantum excitation of a field” or a “bit of energy in a field.” Such an excitation or energy in a field could be a wave in the medium of space. Another definition was “a point-like collapsed quantum wave function,” but waves should not need to totally collapse for discrete properties to occur, and as we have discussed, there are no dimensionless points and hence no point particles (see 2.6). Still another answer was that particles might be vibrating strings (see 2.3). This small survey suggests two things. First, physicists who work with particle physics do not have an entirely uniform concept of what a particle is. Second, particle physicists are able to transcend the intuitive sense of particles as small compact chunks of matter, which is encouraging.

Regardless of this flexibility, continued use of the particle terminology may have the potential to perpetuate inaccurate impressions in the general public, confusion among students, and perpetuation of a subconscious attitude even among physicists, that they are the “real stuff,” and the space that they occupy and that lies between them is not. This can be a psychological barrier to considering the possibility that the opposite is true, and that physical reality is entirely based on waves and other processes in the medium of space. Avoiding this duality and concentrating on that more useful concept could potentially introduce some helpful simplicity to physics.

In order to fully identify matter particles as waves, a method for notation and calculation can be useful. In 1925, not long after De Broglie’s proposal and thesis, Edwin Schrödinger developed a wave equation that included all of the variables needed to fulfill the quantum mechanics properties of any particle, and most others except for spin. Schrödinger’s equation is widely used through the present time (Johnson 2020). The same year it was proposed, Werner Heisenberg and colleagues developed a matrix mechanics formulation for quantum theory (Heisenberg 1933), an alternate system that is less utilized.

The qualities of the relevant entities considered as particles today can be described both mathematically and physically independently of any particulate nature. Particles are already considered to have wave equivalents. The evolution of conceptualization would be to think of them as waves that sometimes behave in a particle-like manner (rather than the reverse) but do not require a dual nature. Over the coming years, it would be encouraging to see a gradual phase-out of references to particles and increasing characterization of quarks, electrons, photons, and neutrinos in terms of resonating waves and other processes in space, except in historical contexts.

In the “Waves of Space” model, the basic structure of matter is considered to be standing waves. Every subatomic unit of matter (proton, neutron, and electron, or quark and electron) is thought to consist of such a wave form, and every object made of matter is a vast complex of such standing waves.

Despite the basic standing wave structure of matter, the gravitational effects of its space-deleting mass property are proposed to disseminate out as traveling waves through space in “gravitational field waves” (see 5.3). A hypothesis will be considered later that kinetic energy from moving matter acts as a traveling wave (see 9.3).

The “Standard Model”: More Particles than Relevance


Although this manuscript is not enthusiastic about particle physics, it does not mean to denigrate its practitioners. Particle physicists include some of our most brilliant scientists, and their motivations are of the highest order. Howard Georgi has described particle theorists like himself as a “fortunate breed” of players in “the most interesting game,” to “determine the rules according to which the world works.” They carry around in their heads “bits and pieces of a majestic jigsaw puzzle,” and it is “rare and wonderful” when the pieces fit together in a “surprising and beautiful way” (Georgi 1989). The years of diligent work by these brilliant scientists have not been in vain. In defining the properties of particles, they have in the process defined the properties of the associated matter waves, and of matter itself.

Nevertheless, some of the particles seem to have been specifically sought in particle colliders partly to test predictions, and to fill in cells and create symmetry in particle tables. There was a motivation to complete the pre-existing “standard model” (Elert 2023; Wolchover et al. 2020), and

regardless of the instability of the resonances found, they were given credit for fulfilling the task. This raises questions about whether physicists at the colliders should have been looking primarily for more sustainable entities and been open to other theories. It suggests to skeptics that the “standard model” might be partly an intellectual exercise rather than entirely an essential tool for studying the truly significant building blocks of the universe.

The “standard model” of modern particle physics was developed in the 1970s and continually expanded since. According to this model at present, there are at least 17 different types of so-called “fundamental particles,” plus the anti-particle (reversed charge) versions of nine particles with electrical charges. In addition, there are a multitude of combination particles.

Of the “fundamental particles,” 12 are called fermions and have “spins” of 1/2, of which six are types of quarks that make up the hadron combinations like protons and neutrons. Only two types of quarks, called “up” and “down,” are stable. These are the components of the protons and neutrons that are in the nuclei of natural atoms. The other four only exist for extremely tiny fractions of a second and must be produced by high energy colliders. Quarks are never detected individually; they are confined by the strong force, usually in twos or threes (Elert 2023; Wolchover et al. 2020, October). All six quarks have charges, so they have anti-quarks with reversed charges.

The other six fermions are leptons, the most familiar and stable of which is the common electron. The lepton group includes two other and much heavier types of electrons (muon and tau) that last for extremely tiny fractions of a second, and three types of neutrinos, of which only the lightest, the electron neutrino, is stable (Strassler 2011). The three electrons have electrical charges,

so they have anti-electrons with reversed charges. (The neutrinos are also considered to have anti-neutrinos with opposite properties, even though they are not charged particles.)

That leaves five other particles called bosons, which have integer or zero “spins.” and are thought to be “gauge” or force-carrying particles. Of those bosons, photons and gluons are massless, while the Z and two oppositely charged W particles are more massive. These particles supposedly carry three of the four fundamental forces, the strong and weak nuclear and the electromagnetic (Wolchover et al. 2020, October). Except for the photon, they cannot be isolated, and hence are considered as “virtual” particles (some photons also being “virtual”). W and Z particles decay. The only familiar member of this group is the photon in its non-“virtual” form. The “standard model” claims that the exchange of virtual bosons back and forth between other particles somehow produces those forces, which may have a good mathematical explanation but is not easy to conceptualize psychologically, or to explain in physical terms.

Virtual bosons are not observable in isolation, so there is only circumstantial evidence for their existence. They can possess and exchange energy and resonate, but so can waves. In the case of quarks, their apparent inability to exist alone could mean that they are components of composite waves that cannot be separated out. Domino Valdano (2022), a theoretical physicist, has produced three definitions for a virtual particle, of which he describes the first as mostly a “mathematical trick,” and the third as the quantum version of an “evanescent (very short-lived) wave.” In his second definition, a virtual particle might ironically be slightly more real and physical than a real particle, but the latter is “just an idealized mathematical abstraction nobody has ever actually measured in a lab.” Taking all of this into account, there would seem to be an argument that virtual bosons, if they exist at all, are waves.

The most recently supposedly detected particle is the Higgs boson, sometimes jokingly referred to as the “God particle.” It is credited with imparting all of the mass that other particles have. This supposedly occurred after the “Big Bang,” via a universal “Higgs field” (Letzer 2020). That might satisfy some equations, but it seems less appealing logically and philosophically. The resonance at a very high energy level at the Large Hadron Collider, that led physicists to announce its discovery, decayed after 1.56*10-22 second. It is reasonable to ask how such an elusive entity could have played its alleged role, particularly if the “Big Bang” itself is questioned? As mentioned above (see 2.3), a theoretical additional particle, a “graviton” to carry the gravitational force, has been postulated but not found (Elert 2023, Sutton 2025).

Only five of the so-called “fundamental particles” (up and down quarks, electrons, photons, and electron neutrinos) last long enough to be common constituents of our universe. The anti-particles of the quarks, electrons (the positrons), and electron neutrino (the anti-neutrinos) could be added, because they could be sustainable, but in usual conditions they rapidly collide with their ordinary versions and are annihilated. Wave collapse is easier to visualize than particle disappearance. The five stable types of ordinary elementary particles are commonly found, because for an unknown reason they predominate numerically (Sutton 2024). Perhaps anti-particles might be more common and predominate in the alternate dimensions.

In addition to the “fundamental particles,” there are hundreds of combination particles. The hadrons are made up of quarks, including the baryons like the proton and neutron that are made of 3 quarks, and the mesons, each made up of a quark and an anti-quark. Of over 200 hadrons, only the proton is stable on its own over long periods. Isolated neutrons decay after about 15 minutes, but they last much longer inside atomic nuclei, perhaps because protons and neutrons inter-convert there

(Strassler 2011). Other hadrons last only for extremely tiny fractions of a second and must be produced by high-energy colliders (Elert 2023; Sutton 2025). None of the mesons are stable.

The unstable entities mentioned above appear in Feynman diagrams depicting particle interactions. However, they are likely to be unsustainable, ultra-brief, transitional wave forms in the rapid process of converting from one more stable wave form to another.
Particle physicists could follow the example of chemists, who make a distinction between intermediates and transition states in chemical reactions. An intermediate is an actual molecular form midway between the initial reactants and the products of a chemical reaction. It may last a few seconds or longer, and in some cases can be isolated. A transition state is like a higher-energy vibration (in this model presumably an unstable transitional wave form) that cannot be isolated and lasts for only a tiny fraction of a second (Gonzales 2025). Chemists do not make the mistake of reifying these states into being actual substances, let alone fundamental ones.

Oscar Gomez (2018) identified five important physics phenomena that the “standard model” cannot explain. These are neutrino mass, “dark matter,” gravity, the paucity of antimatter, and the acceleration of expansion of the universe (“dark energy”). Wolchover, et al. (2020) noted that it omits the “color” property. Others have mentioned the mystery of proton mass, which cannot be explained by the much smaller masses of its constituent quarks. While most of the physics community currently accepts the “standard model,” there are dissenters who consider it as “totally wrong” (Cahill 2017).

It is reasonable to question the relevance of any proposed particles that last only an extremely tiny fraction of a second, except as momentary components of transitions between more stable wave forms. In the “Standard Model,” some of these particles have supposed importance in the

structure of the universe, but those functions cannot be proven. For such particles to continue to be present, they would need to be re-created billions of times per second, and there is no clear way that this could be possible. The unstable particles are sometimes thought to have had relevance and more stability at the beginning of the “Big Bang” (Green 2004), but that of course is even more speculative than the “Big Bang” itself. Philosophers of science can debate how relevant such entities are to science and whether they are worth the amount of study and investment they are receiving. Even the few stable particles have wave equivalents, and can be thought of as wave forms with resonance, so referring to them as particles at all is unnecessary.

Mechanical Waves


Not all waves are transmitted through "empty" space, i.e., space that lacks a substantial presence of matter. Mechanical waves require matter as a medium (Gregerson 2016; Kaylegian-Starkey & Howard 2023). They include both traveling waves, such as sound and those in oceans, and standing waves such as those in musical instruments. Mechanical waves occur only in the locations in which matter exists. There they constitute the wave form of motion, utilizing kinetic energy (see 9.3).
Familiarity with common mechanical waves and the past belief that “matter cannot act where it is not” (McMullin 2002) likely convinced Descartes and other early scientists to believe that all waves required a material medium, and thereby contributed to the aether theory.

Since the “Waves of Space” model characterizes matter as a complex cluster of wavelets representing all of the subatomic components within it (e.g., within molecules), mechanical waves would be waves within waves. That is, the waves that constitute matter would be oscillating in waves, all of this occurring within the medium of space.

QUANTUM QUERIES

In Section 7, we reviewed the “standard model” of supposedly fundamental particles, considered whether the ones that are not stable or sustainable are relevant, and pondered whether they could all be considered as waves. Quantum considerations were frequently mentioned, but when space was described as consisting of quantized units, the meaning was not explained. Now, we shall take a brief look at a few possible interactions of the “Waves of Space” model with quantum mechanics.

Quantization, and Hypothetical Small-scale to-and fro Transfers of “Volons”

Quantum theory developed incrementally, starting with discoveries by Max Planck in 1900, three years after discovery of the electron and five years before special relativity (Styer 1999). Like relativity, it has been developed by a series of brilliant physicists.

However, Hobson noted continuing problems with the theory (2017):
“It’s surprising that, more than a century after the quantum’s birth, quantum fundamentals are still in dispute. At the 2011 “Quantum Physics and the Nature of Reality” conference organized by Anton Zeilinger, 27 physicists, 5 philosophers, and 3 mathematicians responded to a prepared questionnaire with 16 multiple- choice questions covering major issues in quantum foundations. Conference participants disagreed widely about several fundamental principles. Meeting organizers summed up the poll by saying, “There is still no consensus in the scientific community regarding the interpretation of the theory’s foundational building blocks...The problem is, it’s not easy to figure out what the equations and words of quantum theory actually mean. The formal mathematical theory is more abstract, and more difficult to interpret concretely, than other physical theories. Many scientists even question whether the

theory describes the real world at all or is instead, simply a useful mathematical prescription for predicting experimental outcomes…”

Quantum mechanics applies to entities that are very small (quantum actions cannot be identified on a macroscopic scale), and occur in units with discrete mass and charge. At the same time, their location and momentum cannot both be simultaneously known (see 8.3) due to the uncertainty principle (Heisenberg 1933). “Volons” are proposed to be in a size range affected by quantum mechanics. They also act by wave action, and their ability to be deleted or added could explain some of the features of uncertainty and probability.

So far in this discussion, the addition of space has been associated with the Hubble expansion, and its acceleration due to “dark energy,” while the deletion of space has been associated with gravity. The space being added or deleted has not included the transfer of complete matter or energy waves. But those might be just predominant directions of the transfer of space under specific conditions, and there might be exceptions. On the Planck or smallest functional scale, movement of individual “volons” of space might be in both directions, back and forth, with one direction predominating but not exclusively. This would be similar to chemical reactions, which proceed in both directions, with one direction usually predominating during reactions but with equilibrium often the end result. The movement of “volons” is likely to be similarly reversible on a small scale. “Free volons” would be most likely to transfer between dimensions in this manner, rather than those incorporated into matter or energy waves.

If a single “volon” of space were to move from our dimensions to the other set, the replacement “volon” transferred back would not necessarily be the same one or restored to exactly the

same location. The determination of which “volons” would move, and the new location, would currently be unpredictable and best dealt with as a matter of probability. This phenomenon might be involved in quantum uncertainty. Back and forth oscillations of “volons” between the two sets of dimensions could in themselves be thought of as waves.

Within a single set of dimensions, because waves by their very nature involve oscillation, there is sometimes an alternation of a property, with uncertainty about which version of the property exists at a particular time and place until a measurement is made. The process of measurement (which may require ultra-short wave gamma waves) can alter the wave function, permitting only one version of the property and no further fluctuation. All of these phenomena are consistent with what we know of quantum mechanics.

Fields and Quantum Field Theories

Recent physics theories rely heavily on a concept of fields, in which values are assigned to locations. Although those locations are points in space, apparently identified by geometrical coordinates, the role of space itself seems to be limited to being a grid for the fields rather than their basic material. If fields were more clearly conceptualized as being areas of space rather than collections of points, it might encourage development of a model such as the current one. Ernan McMullin (2002) has written a history of the concept of fields in physics, tracing centuries of debate among philosophers and scientists about how actions could take place at a distance.

In this article, the term “field” for purposes of this article was previously defined (see 1.6 and 5.3). However, there are different concepts of fields in quantum field theory or QFT. According to one interpretation, every type of elementary particle has a field, and the particles are localized

vibrations in those fields (Lincoln 2013). Another interpretation is that fields create particles, and that they are therefore more fundamental than those particles (Strogatz & Tong 2022). In the pre-quantum version of fields, they were associated with forces; in the quantum version, they are associated with particles (Taylor 1989). Various characterizations of how particles relate to fields were included in some of the definitions of particles that Wolchover received in her small survey (see 7.2).

.	Some physicists consider QFT as a negation of fundamental particles, and that the fields totally replace them (Hobson 2013). Others consider QFT to be essential to particle physics and a way to calculate particle interactions (Wolchover 2020, November).

The wave nature of the “Waves of Space” model may be somewhat compatible with quantum mechanics and QFT. It is less clear whether the concept of discrete “volons” of space is compatible, because of unresolved issues in quantum theory. On the one hand, there are calls to “discretize” space (conceptualize it in terms of discrete units). However, there is a Nielsen-Ninomiya Theorem in quantum mechanics, which some physicists believe may prohibit breaking down space into discrete units (Strogatz & Tong 2022).

Components of QFT include quantum electrodynamics, which unifies electromagnetism with the weak nuclear force into an “electroweak” force, and quantum chromodynamics, which theoretically explains the strong nuclear force by means of gluons (Paschos 2007; Elert 2023). QFT is considered by some physicists to have been a remarkably successful theory, which seems somewhat ironic since there are differences of opinion about its essence and conclusions. However, some physicists also think that its math is incomplete and that it will never impress mathematicians as being rigorous enough (Strogatz & Tong 2022).

Sheng Qin (2022) has claimed that there is a basic flaw in the common conception that fields contain energy. If in every new position of an object it sends out a new field, and especially if the object accelerates, he asked, what happens to the energy in the field from its last location? Is it mysteriously reabsorbed by the mass or charge? He has argued that there is no generally accepted theory for such a process. In the present model, the fields are areas of space in which waves or other processes are active, and in contrast to some current conceptions of fields, they do not contain energy independent of those waves or processes.

What and Where is a Quantum Wave Function?


The waves of space include quantum wave forms, so what and where those are deserves some brief attention. The equations of quantum wave forms are often described as the probabilities of finding an electron or other small mass entity at certain locations, a view often referred to as the Copenhagen interpretation. That would be reasonable if those entities were really particles and had specific locations. However, the alternative concept is that each mass entity is actually a wave, and that a quantum equation describes the range of locations among which the wave is distributed. The latter concept is favored here, and is considered to be a majority opinion (Norton 2022, February), which will be utilized for this discussion.

The uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics, (indeterminacy in position)* (indeterminacy in momentum) > h/2π, was derived by Heisenberg from De Broglie’s equation momentum =
(Planck’s constant)/wavelength. It requires that if we precisely localize a wave, its momentum must be entirely undefined and must include every possible value; and that if we precisely identify the momentum, the location is similarly undefined, and either the wave is spread out throughout the

universe or the probability of finding it is. But those are the extreme solutions. Wave packets are usually considered to be in an intermediate situation, where both location and momentum are partially known.

The vast majority of the location probabilities would be within a small volume, because rapid reduction as the wave would spread would make further extension negligible. Therefore, an electron may be a wave that includes minute portions extending out into space, but its location is predominantly within the volume of its atom (Norton 2022, February). Our senses of vision and touch assign definite borders as to where matter in its solid and liquid phases is macroscopically. That could be partly because beyond those borders, the diffuse extension of matter waves becomes inconsequential.

TIME AND MOTION

In Section 8, we examined possible implications of our model on quantum mechanics and quantum field theories. Now, we shall move on again to consider some miscellaneous topics (a potpourri) directly and indirectly related to time and motion. In the course of the discussion, we shall touch on time itself, a classification of motion, electromagnetism, and the “arrows” of the universe. The latter may be less universally unidirectional than sometimes thought.

Time as a Function of Repetitive Motion in Space


The question of what time really is deserves some special consideration. No other dimension extends in only one direction. In our experience, we can go forward or backward in space but only forward in time. In this discussion, known concepts used in the definition and measurement of units of time will

be referenced, to point out that it is convenient but not necessary to consider time as a dimension, let alone as a component of a four-dimensional spacetime. Space, made up of “volons,” is primary, and time describes displacements within space that recur.

.	There have been many different philosophical approaches to the nature of time, from thinkers in ancient India, China, and Greece, through recent physicists like Stephen Hawking (Ramabrahmam 2018, Hawking 1988). Aristotle defined time in terms of motion, and motion can occur without the need to conceive of time as a dimension (Rassi 2014). Regardless of different philosophical concepts of time, there has been remarkable uniformity at a practical level in how units of time are measured. Units of time have always been determined by comparison of the events to be timed with selected repetitive movements. Historically, the selected repetitive movements have been astronomical, such as rotations of the earth (days), revolutions around the sun (years), lunar cycles (months), and movement of the sun across the sky (days and hours). Other repetitive motions used for time measurement more recently include pendulum swings, balance wheel oscillations, quartz crystal vibrations, and electron jumps up and down among energy levels around atomic nuclei in atomic clocks (Hadhazy 2010).

The repetitive motions used as measures of time must occur at regular intervals. Our common understanding of “regular” is that the interval between each repetition takes the same amount of time, thus seeming to produce a circular definition that defines time in terms of itself. But that does not turn out to be a problem. Instead, we can compare one type of repetitive motion with another, for example, how many rotations of the earth per revolution around the sun (how many days in a year), or how many such rotations from one full moon to another (how many days in a lunar month). A constant or

almost constant ratio of two or more types of repetitive motion implies regularity of both (although they could both be changing at the same rate).

Mach seems to have had a similar concept of time and regularity. In discussing time, he said it was an “abstraction,” and that “A motion is termed uniform in which equal increments of space described correspond to equal increments of space described by some motion with which we form a comparison, as the rotation of the earth. A motion may, with respect to another motion, be uniform” (Mach 1883). Sorli and Fiscaletti viewed time as a “numerical order in space” (Zyga 2012).

An event is the measured entity in the numerator that is to be timed by comparison with the selected repetitive motion. The event to be timed will usually also be a motion, but it could be any process involving “volon mechanics” or additions or deletions of space (see 8.1) A single event can be assigned a time, based on how many fractions of a repetition have occurred between them.

Thus time can be defined just in terms of recurring motions in space. We accept a day and a year as units of time, but to be more aware of the dependence of time on space, we can be reminded that a day is a rotation of the earth in space, and the interval between successive solar high noons. A year is a revolution of the earth around the sun. The number of units into which some such repetitive motions are divided, such as hours in a day, minutes in an hour, and seconds in a minute, is arbitrary, and is set by convention so that people can agree on when events have occurred or are planned to occur.

It is possible to delete the familiar symbols for time from any physics equation, by substituting fractions of repeating astronomical motions in space. Time in an equation is usually in the denominator. e.g., we want to know the number of events per unit of time.

To express the unit of time such as the second in terms of a repeating astronomical motions in space, we can use a fraction in the denominator made up of two variables. One is the selected astronomical event, such as a rotation of the earth or a revolution around the sun (which will be called Er , for events that repeat or recur). The other is the number of equal parts into which we wish to divide up Er to derive a shorter interval to compare with the numerator (which will be called Per, for portions of the event recurrence). An hour is one 24th of a day, so . A second is one 86,440th of a day (calculated by division of a day into 24 hours * 60 minutes * 60 seconds or 86,440 seconds). If Er is a day, Per could be 24 for an hour (a 24th of a day). or 86,440 for a second. Er /Per would be a day divided by 24 for an hour, or a day divided by 86,440 for a second. So the equation v = s/t (velocity = distance/time) could be written as in equation (5). The speed of an automobile traveling at 50 kilometers per hour could be stated as 50 kilometers per (earth rotation/24) or 50 kilometers*24 per earth rotation, and the speed of light as 300,000 kilometers per (earth rotation/86,440) or 300,000 kilometers*86,440 per earth rotation.

v = s/(Er /Per) = s*Per /Er	(5)


This exercise was included just to help emphasize that time is recognized and measured only in relation to regularly repeating motions in space. Space provides the real dimensions of the universe. However useful they may be, time and particularly spacetime are merely functions of events that take place in space, and it is optional to consider them as dimensions. In the remainder of this article, time will be referred to in the usual manner, to avoid confusion. Time as we understand it in common usage is a helpful concept, to which humans are strongly bound, and there is no need to eliminate it in order to apply the “Waves of Space” model. However, it is important to realize that

time depends on space and is ultimately a function of motions through space, just as Aristotle recognized.

In 1967 the General Conference on Weights and Measures redefined the second as the

duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two

hyperfine levels of the ground state of the cesium-133 atom, at a temperature of as close as possible to 0o K. (Betts and Hosch 2007, Scharping 2020). This too can be considered as a repetitive motion
(occurring in this case in a very minute amount of space), just like any other criterion for a unit of

time.


In our common experience, time is one of the “arrows” (along with space expansion and the entropy increase of thermodynamics) that only proceed in one direction. There is a relationship between space expansion and time passage, as repetitive motions in space continue in our expanding dimensions. Backward-moving time under special conditions is a theoretical possibility. Gerald Marsh (2014) wrote that the expansion of the universe, entropy increase, and time are inextricably linked. He referred to the arrow of time as “thermodynamic time.” However, he also said that in “Friedmann-Lemaître spacetimes,” even in a universe that was contracting and entropy was reversing, time would still flow in the same direction as it does in our currently expanding universe.
Hypothetical backward-moving time will be discussed in relation to black holes (see 9.5).


Doing without Spacetime

The concept of spacetime was proposed by Hermann Minkowski in 1908 (Marsh 2014, Galison 1979). This was three years after the publication of special relativity, so it had no influence on the initial formulation of that theory. Einstein is said to have not initially been comfortable with

Minkowski’s idea of spacetime. Although special relativity made adjustments to both space and time (see 6.2), its conception did not apparently require or incorporate a four-dimensional manifold.
However, a decade after the release of special relativity, Einstein incorporated four-dimensional spacetime as an essential part of the mathematics of general relativity.

Minkowski made the following bold prediction (Minkowski 1908):


“The views of space and time which I wish to lay before you have spring (sic) from the soul of experimental physics, and therein lies (sic) its strength. They are radical. Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two will preserve an independent reality.”

That prediction has turned out to have been an overstatement. The term spacetime is widely used by physical scientists, but as in many of the citations in this article, they often are referring to space over the course of time, rather than to a single combined manifold. Spacetime has been integrated mathematically into many areas of physics, and in those applications, it is useful. But even physicists who specialize in relativity check the time on their watches or phones, and use rulers and tape measures for distance, like the rest of us. There are no instruments in practical use that measure distance or time in terms of spacetime, and no one can actually visualize four dimensions.

Three-dimensional calculations were used for many centuries. In the “Waves of Space” model, three-dimensional explanations have been offered for the curved paths produced by gravity (see 5.1), for the Lorentz transformations (see 6.2), and for conditions related to black holes, so four-dimensional relativistic calculations may not be needed. The model does include a set of three extra theoretical dimensions, but no more than one set of three needs to be considered for calculations at

any one time (see 2.4. Although calculations within either set of three dimensions are complicated by continual localized deletions and additions of space, the mathematics should be simpler with a three-dimension than a four-dimensional manifold (Wolfram 2015).

Some theoretical physicists apparently think that unifying relativity with quantum mechanics will require an overthrow of the concept of spacetime (Wood 2024). Some working with string theory think that spacetime is “emergent” from a more fundamental reality. Others specializing in loop quantum gravity believe that spacetime is broken down into units, a concept with similarities (see 2.3) to the present model (Becker 2022). Sorli and Fiscaletti supported a return to three-dimensional space separate from time, and said that there is no experimental support for considering time as a fourth dimension (Zyga 2012).

What is Motion? Several Types, Including the Mechanics of Matter through Space

Motion has been mentioned but not yet been defined, classified, or related to mechanisms of the “Waves of Space” model. Motion is a change of position of matter over time, relative to a separate frame of reference. The energy for all motion is kinetic.

Material objects maintain their structural integrity as they move through space at normal speeds and gravitation (well below that the speed of light and the gravity of a black hole). The wave nature of material objects consists of very complex and organized combinations of smaller standing waves that stay intact as they change in location. Each material object must move through space as a unit, as it is inconceivable for something as complex as matter to be continually reconstituted, at every Planck length or any other distance interval.

Not everything in the universe can be simplified and unified. It appears that there may be several different types of motion. Motion is traditionally classified (Shah 2024) as linear or translational (rectilinear or curvilinear, changing the location along a path), rotational (changing the orientation of the body or spinning), periodic (following a repetitive path), oscillatory (to and fro), or “random” (pattern of the path not predictable). While these distinctions are important descriptively, the additional classification presented below relates each type of motion to such things as its mechanism of generation, its relation to units of space, and its relation to waves. This is a classification that can be applied to kinematics, and includes both uniform (steady) and accelerating motion.

Space addition: This is the motion of recession in the Hubble expansion, already

discussed (see 3.1 and 3.2). It is likely that as new space appears, its effect on the recession is not instantaneous throughout the universe, but rather that it propagates outward at a finite rate, either the speed of light or the velocity of recession, which can be slower or faster than light depending on distance. The expansion is three-dimensional rather than linear, which helps to create homogeneity. New “volons” are expected to join in the motions of existing “volons” (see 3.1). When new space joins existing space, it can be expected to set off a wave of displacement of other “volons,” including those in matter waves such as astronomical bodies.
Space deletion and its replacement: This is the motion of gravitation, also previously

discussed in detail (see 5.1). It is not out of keeping with accepted physics for gravity to be considered as a separate type of motion, considering that general relativity is a separate theory devoted to explaining gravity. In the present model, the deletion of

“volons” by mass and the in-flow of other “volons” for replacement, are continuous in every gravitational field, regardless of whether there happen to be zero or millions of material objects items or light waves close enough to be pushed in toward the mass by spatial pressure. Gravitational deletion of space occurs within matter, and the cascade of “volons” extends throughout the field, replacing the deletions and then each other. The deletion of space, the gravitational potential energy stored as spatial pressure, and the wave-like replacement process have been discussed (see 5.1 and 5.3).
Mechanical wave motion: This includes the motion of mechanical waves like sound

that require matter as a medium and travel relatively slowly. More controversial to include in this category are waves like electromagnetic in which nothing with rest mass or defined as matter moves. The oscillating material substance (e.g., molecules or electrons) moves in repeated small to-and-fro paths determined by the wave amplitude (which varies in standing waves and is zero at nodes). Typically, the units of this substance do not move forward, but the wave action itself propagates forward in linear traveling waves (though not in standing waves).
Elastic displacement: Matter that can be stretched or compressed encounters more

resistance and builds up more potential energy, the greater the displacement (see 3.2) within tolerated limits, as per Hooke’s law (M. Williams 2015). This has been contrasted with the weakening of gravity with space expansion (see 4.1). The rebound caused by that potential energy is part of an oscillation that can generate waves in media and space. In the model, when a substance made of standing matter waves stretched, “free volons” would be pushed in by spatial pressure to fill any extra space, and when it contracted, they would be pushed out.

Electromagnetic motion (repulsion, attraction,:and induction): This has been
previously reviewed, including speculation on wave interactions (see 7.1). Charges and magnetic poles would not delete or add “volons” but would become closer or farther away from each other. These interactions can be blocked or shielded by opposing charges. Motion of an electrical charge produces magnetism (magnetic induction), and motion of a magnet produces an electrical current in a conductor (electrical induction). The model does not provide a complete explanation.
Mechanical motion associated with force and space displacement: This is the common

motion of matter, both uniform and accelerated, generated by mechanical force (then decelerated to a steady velocity if uniform). It is difficult to define in a way that distinguishes it clearly from the other types of motion, but it can be considered as “none of the above.” “The “Waves of Space” hypothesis is that when a material object moves in this manner, many “free volons” within the water and air are displaced, just as the air and water are. The space in front of an object in linear motion is transferred toward the rear in a set of concurrent “volon” exchanges, via a route around its sides, top, and bottom , so that a similar number of other “volons” end up behind the object. The process described below is suggested as one possible way in which this could occur in a wave-like manner. Analogies are swimming and flying through air. The location of a swimmer or boat advances in a forward direction, while water that is displaced moves backward. Similarly, the location of a bird advances in a forward direction, while air moves backward. Similarly, a group of “free volons” in the same locations as the water and air should move backward with respect to a moving body, making way for the body to move forward. This is another way of

conceptualizing Newton’s third law of motion, because the motion forward would be creating an “equal and opposite reaction” backward (Helmenstine 2024).

To help conceptualize this process, imagine a boat moving through a lake. Part is above the water, in contact with air, and part below, in contact with water. For each unit of distance encountered and passed by the boat, it pushes molecules of air and water out of the way, making room for itself. Anyone who has traveled on a boat knows that its motion creates waves, including a wake, and also a breeze as air is encountered. It is reasonable to suppose that “free volons” will be part of wave motion similar to that in air and water, as the boat or other object moves through space in addition to moving through the air and water.

Oscillations should be produced by reciprocal motions of “volons.” The “volons” pushed out of the way should soon follow curved pathways, first toward each side and the top and bottom of the boat or other moving object, and then continuing to curve toward the rear. The shape of this movement should be similar to that of magnetic flux (and of mythical lines of force) between the north and south poles of a magnet.
Individual “volons” starting on those pathways cannot jump all the way to the back of the moving object. Instead, there should be a flow from front to back that can be conceptualized as “volons” pushing other “volons,” which push still other “volons” until an appropriate number reach the back to fill the gap created by the movement of the moving object. These “volon” movements have been described above as if they occur sequentially, but they are actually concurrent (though not instantaneous).

Continuing the example of a boat, a more detailed hypothetical conception that could explain wave-like transmission is that the “volons” displaced by the boat join and expand the nearest local arrangements of “free volons” along each pathway. (“Volon” arrangements conceptually would not have fixed borders but would act as groups when additional “volons” joined or left,) This expansion is rapidly alternated with contraction, as “volons” (not necessarily the same ones) leave the arrangement they are in and impact and join the next local arrangement of “volons” in the same manner. Meanwhile, that next local arrangement will have expanded from the “volons” joining it and contracted due to passing “volons” on further to the next local arrangement. The oscillating expansions and contractions might extend on and on, toward the rear of the moving object, where a gap must be prevented. Since the front and the rear of the boar move together, concurrently to the “volon” displacements at the front of the boat, near the rear, “volons” would leave the local arrangement of “free volons” nearest to the rear location vacated by the boat, and would be replaced by “volons” from the next arrangement further forward. The “volon” displacement from front to back would thus be continuous and concurrernt, not sequential.

The oscillating expansions and contractions of all the local arrangements of “volons,” due to their synchronized out-flows and replacement in-flows, would act as a wave. Such waves will tentatively be called “space displacement waves,” because they are generated by displaced “volons.” There might be more than one type of wave with separate distributions and speeds. Those portions of the “space displacement waves” that impact the surroundings might disseminate out surrounding space (within the water or air) at a slower rate, their amplitudes diminishing with distance.

In addition, there might theoretically be a separate and much slower wake of turbulence in space (separate from that in matter) following behind any moving object in a cone shape. Wakes

following vessels have long been identified in water and air and are a hazard to other vehicles. Such a phenomenon has not been identified in space alone, but may be worth researching, because it could impact the flight of missiles fired into space at rapid velocities and in parallel paths. Wakes in water behind boats were found by Lord Kelvin to travel at 81.6% of the speed of the boat (Jennings 2022), while wake vortices created by large aircraft produce vortices and have been clocked at only 1.5-3.5 meters/second (Khoury 2023). Either of these can be detected for hundreds of meters.

The boat, like any other moving object, has mass, which will gravitationally delete some “volons,” particularly those it encounters head-on (see 5.1 and 6.2). A boat or any other object moving through matter like a liquid or gas in addition to space will of course also experience friction, not discussed above.

All types of motion can interact on a macro level. As examples, a moving ball can strike a body falling due to gravity, and knock it back up or change its trajectory. Gravity can limit the rate of the Hubble expansion. If an object has an electrical charge, its path can be modified by another charge or magnet, and because it also has the other properties of matter, alternatively by a missile, a spring, or gravity. In other classification systems, some of the types of motion just reviewed are considered instead to be categories of energy (e.g., gravitational, sound, elastic, electromagnetic).
That categorization was not adopted because they all use variations of kinetic energy.


Motion is Relatively “Real”


Since matter waves are hypothesized to be capable of motion through space, as just discussed, it seems relevant to consider how we know if something is moving. Whether non-accelerating motion can be absolute has been the subject of philosophical and mathematical discussion since antiquity

(Huggett & Hoefer 2021). The concept of absolute motion implies that there is some absolute frame of reference to compare to that is at rest or in a constant state, but the consensus for the last hundred years or so is that there is no such absolute frame of reference with which to compare motion and position, and a state of absolute rest does not actually exist (Norton 2022, January).

Real motion, in contrast, implies a displacement of an object from one location to another, but does not require any absolute frame. The “Waves of Space” model would propose that constant, non-accelerating motion is “real,” but not absolute. This could be considered as a clarification of the Principle of Relativity, specifying that it is possible to distinguish motion that is “real,” i.e., which of two bodies is “really” moving at a greater velocity than another. However, the detection and measurement of the motion must be relative to that of other reference bodies in a designated frame of reference.

In the model, there are real “volons,” through which waves and other processes in space move. Motion by a body would change the distances to other bodies or sources of light situated in space, and would involve an exchange in position of a wave made up of multiple “volons” with respect to other “volons.” We can only detect motion by changes in position of one entity relative to those of others, so for detection and measurement, motion is relative.

We can assume that everything is in motion, and that changes in relative positions between two bodies can be detected from either one. It is therefore admittedly difficult to analyze the motion of different objects, except by comparison with other objects subject to similar conditions.
Gravitation (not dealt with in special relativity) and rapid velocity also complicate the measurement

of motion. In the current model, that is because they both delete some of the space traversed and slow clock speed.

Although special relativity rejects absolute motion (Einstein 1921; Norton 2022, January), it accepts the absolute local detection of acceleration. As summarized by Gibbs (1996), in special relativity “Velocities are relative but acceleration is treated as absolute.” In Minkowski spacetime there is a background structure, and there could be absolute motion without acceleration, in relation to that structure (Huggett & Hoefer 2021). However, the current model argues only for distinguishable and not absolute motion.

When two objects pass each other, if neither is currently accelerating, according to common interpretations of the Principle of Relativity, there is supposedly no way for an observer to tell by mechanical experiments which of the two is moving and thereby has more kinetic energy (Gregerson 2019). However, that applies to a local comparison of only two objects, without access to the history of the objects or to the positions of multiple distant bodies for comparison. Actually, there are at least five ways to distinguish which of two objects in steady, non-accelerating motion in the same frame of reference is “really” moving through space more than the other, because of added motion that was imparted more to one than to the other.

Difference in time elapsed, i.e., aging: The first difference (and an argument ironically
from special relativity itself) is that less time should elapse on clocks (and in aging of living things) on the body to which more “real” motion has been imparted. This time dilation in a “real” traveler whose twin remains on earth is the basis of the famous “twin paradox” (Marder 1971). Information could be exchanged between the twins

along the way about clock and aging measurements as the traveling twin continued in a linear path, so differences in elapsed time would not depend on decelerations and reaccelerations as is sometimes claimed. The difference of time elapsed on moving vs. hypothetically stationary clocks has been experimentally confirmed, and debate as to why it occurs have been going on for well over a century. But it is a paradox only if “real” motion is not distinguishable. The twins have different histories as per “b” below. Clearly recognizing that the traveling twin has been in “real” motion should eliminate the paradox.
Contextual history: The second difference is that in many real-world comparisons in

which one body passes by another, one of them is and the other is not in a situation where it could have been moving. For example, one may have been in a vehicle, while the other has been in a stationary building. In the twin example of “a” above, the traveler has been in a space ship and has undergone a long, confined journey, while the non-traveler has had a normal life on earth and no equivalent means of moving through space.
Dynamic history: The third difference between a body with more “real” motion and

one with less is that they have different dynamic histories of kinetic energy having been imparted to them by temporary acceleration. Thus, observers on each of two bodies in relative motion to one another could reasonably believe that they were at rest and that the other body was moving, if historical records of past acceleration were unavailable, but not if it is known that one was first accelerated and then decelerated to a steady velocity to achieve its state of motion and the other was not. In Einstein’s

thought experiments about relative motion, there is no access to such historical information (Einstein 1905, 1921).
Change of relative position: A fourth difference (utilizing relative motion as consistent

with both relativity theories to distinguish “real” motion) is that movement can also be judged by changes of position relative to landmarks in other frames of reference, on earth or in space, taking into account those bodies’ own relative motions. The limitations in distinguishing which of only two bodies is moving, if they can only be compared with one another, no longer apply when comparisons with additional external and independent bodies in different frames of reference are added. One body but not the other may be identified as moving by a global positioning system (GPS, which itself uses relative methods of evaluating positions), or by passing landmarks such as mountains or lakes whose only possible movement is that of the earth as a whole, or by changing its orientation to a geosynchronous satellite. Not only will the environment look different and continuously change as viewed from the moving body, but if it moves from the northern hemisphere toward the southern or vice versa, the positions of the stars will look different as well. In terms of statistical probability, the more frames of reference relative to which an isolated and relatively small object of interest changes its position in a similar direction, and the fewer frames to which a comparison object does so, the more likely it is that the object of interest is “really” moving, or moving more than the comparison object. It is much less likely that the object of interest is at relative rest and that the comparison object and all those frames of reference are moving past it instead.

Gravitational field adjustment: A fifth difference, which depends on the “Waves in
Space” model, is that the body with more “real” motion should have greater spatial adjustments, including non-uniformity, of its gravitational field (see 6.3). Gravitation as we know is not included in special relativity. In the case of a massive body such as a star or a galaxy, the non-uniformity might be detectable by comparing the gravitational bending of light in front of vs. behind the direction of motion, as measured from a separate and neutral frame of reference.

The conclusion is that uniform motion is can be distinguished as “real” though not as absolute, and that apparent motion by a body that does not fulfill any of the criteria above is illusory and not “real.” However, motion can only be detected and measured relative to other objects, so even “real” motion is relative. Because everything in the universe is in various combinations of motion (gravitational, expansion, electromagnetic, etc.), a specific motion added to this complex can be difficult to separate out and study. Quantum effects should also apply at subatomic distances, so that motion can be considered quantum compatible.

Because of these factors, it is useful to consider the baseline pre-motion state for an object whose motion is to be studied, as being at rest relative to various other objects in the same frame of reference. Items whose positions are used for reference should either be relatively stable in relation to the object’s frame of reference, or else their own motions should be well understood and taken into account. In those respects, landmarks that are non-moving with respect to a frame of reference can be ideal for the relative measurement of ”real” motion.

9.5..Time, Mass, and Matter in a Black Hole

There are at least three possibilities of what happens to objects falling into a black hole.


The first possibility, and a common conception, is that matter passing the event horizon (the Schwarzschild radius, rs=2GM/c2), with its mass property intact, would continue inward to some sort of a “singularity” at the center, as proposed by Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking (Hawking 1988; UCSB Science Line 2008; Hamilton 2006). It should either disintegrate there, or the laws of physics would break down there. This is consistent with general relativity, in which indefinite shrinkage in size can occur without consideration of what happens to the constituents of matter and how they maintain their function, whether waves or hypothetical particles (see 6.1 and 7.2). As already discussed, however (see 2.6), a “singularity” is an abstraction that cannot exist in reality (Sutter 2022, February). Speaking of the theoretical “singularity” at the center of a black hole, astrophysicist Paul Sutter recognized (2022, February) that “… it doesn't really exist. Something has to replace the “singularity,” but we're not exactly sure what.” He also suggested that what happens inside a black hole is not only unknown but may never be knowable.

Another consideration is that gravitation decreases within the interior of a mass, for example becoming zero at the center of the earth, because there are equal forces in every direction, cancelling each other out. At the center of a black hole, there might analogously be no gravitational force.

A second possibility is that objects might fall no further than the event horizon, and would disintegrate there. One reason to suspect the possibility of the event horizon as the limit is that time would supposedly stop there, at least as judged from outside of the black hole. Falling

objects would not progress further because they could no longer move at all due to the time stoppage.

If there is disintegration of matter, whether at the center of a black hole or at the event horizon, the current model would suggest that would be due to in-motion of so many more “volons” than could be replenished that the matter wave structures would not survive. If replacement of deleted “volons” in a black hole were possible, it might take a very long time (see 6.1), and there might be no adequate source of “free volons” for such replacement.

As an object approached very near to a black hole, three-dimensional shrinkage would be expected (see 6.4). However, according to Hawking (1988), shortening of the object in the axis toward the center of gravity would be disproportionally great and would produce stretching “like spaghetti,” because a gradient of gravitational strength would be evident at very short distances, and the portion of an object closer to the event horizon would be subject to greater gravitational “pull.” The object would then be torn apart. The interpretation of the present model would be that extreme “volon” deletions would disrupt and destroy matter waves. Ironically, this effect should be less in a more powerful black hole, such as a “supermassive” one at the center of a galaxy, because it would be larger and the gradient of force would extend over a longer range of radius (Lin 2024).

A third possibility is that matter would accumulate at the event horizon, becoming smaller and smaller, but would not disintegrate or dissociate from mass, and that both matter and mass would survive in some form. Any such surviving object would have near-zero size. The

Schwarzschild radius increases gradually as the amount of ingested mass grows, and might be able to encompass a myriad of such tiny objects.

A problem with either of the first two possibilities is how mass but not matter waves would survive. Many physicists believe that matter cannot survive in a black hole, which has been described as a “tomb of matter” (Impey 2021). Yet a black hole is expected to accumulate mass as it swallows up more and more matter. There may therefore be a dissociation between matter and its mass waves, the same process proposed for “dark matter” (see 5.4). There seems to be little discussion in physics literature of the relationship between matter and mass, and how it is affected when matter breaks down. Mass waves alone, if they are standing waves like those in matter, might require much less space (fewer “volons”) than matter waves, and hence might be able to exist in an extremely contracted black hole. On the other hand, they could be spread out over volumes of space where “dark matter” is believed to exist. The persistence of mass when matter shrinks (see 6.4) is an additional indication that the two are not always proportional.

The deletion of “volons” from matter can be thought of as having three levels of susceptibility. “Free volons” filling the many gaps in the matter waves but not essential to their structure could presumably be deleted most readily. “Volons” that are actually part of standing matter waves but are involved in non-mass properties such as electrical charge might be the next most susceptible to deletion. The most resistant would be those “volons” involved in the space-deleting property of mass. Those could end up on their own as the last remnants of matter.

Why mass does not break down when matter presumably does is unknown, but any such breakdown would presumably be due to “volon” deletion, and mass waves are thought in this model

to be the cause of that. The destruction of mass would require the breakdown of the very mechanism of breakdown, and might therefore tend to shut itself off. Perhaps mass waves can break down, but only over a vast amount of time.

The speed of light and an event horizon are both limitations for matter, but they differ. There is only one speed of light in all reference frames, but there can be black holes of different strengths. Also, matter cannot reach the speed of light but can actually reach an event horizon (though that might be the end of it).

Time in the usual direction is believed to slow to a stop at the event horizon, as viewed from a distant frame of reference (Impey 2021). If so, penetration further inside a black hole would be problematic. In the absence of forward-moving time, if objects could still exist at the event horizon (at extremely small size) and continued to fall, that might only be possible in time that began very slowly to flow backward,

Time reversal is not a concept foreign to physics, and might theoretically occur in a black hole. Ernst Stuekelberg and later Richard Feynman proposed an interpretation of the positron (an antimatter electron) as an electron moving backward in time (Schwartz 2015). If so, the small amount of antimatter in the universe could be accounted for by the rarity of negative time. Gravitational acceleration is G*m/r2, as per equation (3). If time were flowing in a negative direction, that acceleration would be in a negative spatial direction as in equation (6).

-g=Gm/r2)	(6)

That would mean that if an object could maintain its existence and could cross the event horizon toward the center, it might thereupon actually move backward rather than forward, in other words back to the event horizon. Therefore, everything would collect at the event horizon rather than continuing on to the center of the black hole, the same result as the second possibility above .

As Chrisy Impey said (2021), we cannot really understand what happens in the interior of a black hole, because physics breaks down. And off course, no traveler can return from a visit inside a black hole to report to us. However, the current model would find the second possibility, disintegration of matter waves at the event horizon, with dissociation and survival of very small mass waves, to be philosophically appealing.

THERMODYNAMICS: HOW REVERSIBLE?

In the last section, we reviewed a mix of topics related to time and motion, including the direction of time, which is commonly experienced to only proceed in one direction but might be capable of reversing under special circumstances (see 9.5). We have also previously reviewed the expansion of the universe (see 3.2) and the suggestion that it too might reverse both in an eventual contraction phase and locally under the influence of gravity. The flow of time and the expansion of the universe are thought of as two of the “arrows” of physics. Another “arrow” is the second law of thermodynamics in which entropy (a tendency toward increasing disorder) has been assumed to continually increase. The “arrows” are considered to be linked (Marsh 2014). It therefore seems appropriate to review the “arrow” of the second law of thermodynamics.

The “Arrow” of Entropy

The second law of thermodynamics requires in general terms that the overall tendency of a system will be toward increased disorder (or at least thermal disorder), and many understand this to mean and greater distances among component parts. Part of a system may acquire increased order only if it imports energy from another part that is becoming much more disordered. At one time, this law was considered as sacrosanct territory in physics. Einstein is said to have written that the second law “is the only universal physical theory that will never be refuted.” Arthur Eddington said in the 1920s that “The law that entropy always increases—the Second Law of thermodynamics—holds, I think, the supreme position among the Laws of Nature” (Kostic 2020). However, in more recent times, attitudes of some scientists toward this law have become more nuanced.

The second law of thermodynamics is based on work by Sadi Carnot and William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), and was stated as a law of physics by Rudolf Clausius in 1850 as: “It is impossible for a self-acting machine, unaided by any external agency, to convey heat from one body to another at a higher temperature” (Wolfram 2023). At the time, heat was thought to be a substance called caloric (see 10.2), so the law said that the caloric moved from hot to cold but not in reverse (Siegfried 2024). That is understood by today’s mechanical theory of heat as saying more or less that a collection of molecules with more vigorous motion will increase the motion of less vigorous molecules. The second law has generally been understood to require that entropy will tend to increase unless energy is applied to force things together and to be more organized (Micu 2023). But even some true believers in the second law admit problems with definitions and ambiguous meanings (Kostic 2020). Scientists have reportedly not been able to agree on how to state the second law precisely, and efforts to prove it mathematically have been inconsistent (Siegfried 2024). We shall explore it a bit historically and philosophically in relation to the current model.

Cold Comfort

The ancient Greeks, including Aristotle, considered fire to be one of four basic substances (along with earth, water, and air). During the last few centuries, heat and cold went through other stages of reification prior to the rise of our current concept. Three phantom substances were postulated, sometimes with competing proponents. The popular theory of phlogiston, a substance of combustion (possibly modeled on the ancient Greek concept of fire as an element), was developed in the early 1700s. In the 1800s, cold was thought by some scientists including Count Rumford to be a substance called frigoric (Chang 2002). Those theories were succeeded by caloric theory introduced by Antoine Lavoisier (Morris 1972). Once heat was discovered to cause the kinetic effect of molecular motion, it gradually became understood as being molecular motion (Siegfried 2024).

Even the formulation about the flow of molecular motion can be reversed to some extent by changing one’s philosophical and semantic perspective. The conception can be inverted to give the power to cold over heat, i.e., to say that cold bodies always dilute the temperature of hotter ones.
While it is true as Clausius declared that a warm body cannot transfer heat at a higher temperature than its own, neither can a cold body transfer chilling at a lower temperature than its own.

When a cup of hot water (with greater molecular motion) is mixed with a cup of cold water (with less molecular motion), after a brief period of molecular collisions, the average molecular motion will determine an intermediate temperature. Physicists and most of the general public of course prefer to think of this as a flow of heat energy to the colder object, but it can alternatively be thought of as a flow of coldness to chill the hotter water. In a steam engine, the condensation of steam back into liquid water is just as vital a step as the production of steam from the water. We think of the

latter as requiring heat energy, but we could instead conceptualize cooling energy to slow down molecular motion. Assuming that the second law is correct, it could be interpreted as meaning that cold is ultimately more powerful than heat, because in the long run things will become colder.

This exercise in conceptual reversal can be carried only so far, because the universe appears to be powered primarily by thermonuclear energy in the stars (including our sun), which of course produces extreme heat. Also, in the example of a steam engine, or in any engine, heating precedes cooling, suggesting that heating is primary and drives the process. But it is a good example of flexibility of perspective, and of how the human mind is capable of multiple interpretations of existence and causation. Past beliefs in false entities like fire as an elementary substance, phlogiston, frigoric, and caloric, and earlier attribution of physical phenomena to gods and demons (Siegfried 2024), are examples.

10.3..New Space, New Energy, Less Entropy?

Of the four recognized forces in physics, gravity and the strong force are attractive forces that can “pull” things into greater order (reduced entropy), but the strong force only functions at very small distances. The weak force is involved in radioactive decay (Taylor 1989), so it is the only one of the four that can be considered entirely to increase entropy, but it is also very short-ranged.
Electromagnetism can both attract and repel, so it has a mixed or neutral effect on entropy. Overall, the mixture of forces that can increase or decrease entropy suggests that we should consider a nuanced approach to whether the dynamics of the universe (perhaps including two sets of dimensions) favor an increase, a decrease, or relative stability of entropy.

One might expect the expansion of the universe to increase entropy. As the volume of our dimensions of the universe increases, existing matter and energy waves can disseminate among the “volons” in that increased space, and become slightly more diluted over time. That would provide a theoretical mechanistic link among the “arrows” of expansion, time, and thermodynamics, assuming that the expansion is associated with the passage of time.

It is commonly believed that the expansion is making the universe colder and that its ultimate fate will be a “Big Freeze,” sometimes referred to as a “heat death” (Bets 2023).	However, the common conception that high light frequency always indicates higher energy is oversimplified.
There appears to be a lack of consistent evidence for a steady decrease in temperature throughout time.
The energy of any type of wave is indeed proportional to its frequency. Frequency is particularly important in interactions with atoms (see 7.1). Even some physicists tend to focus only on frequency when they discuss the CMB. However light energy is also proportional to the square of the amplitude, and therefore amplitude has more impact. For example, you can have a bright red light with more energy than a dim blue light, or a hot infra-red light and a cool ultraviolet bulb. The The CMB is very cold because it is spread out thinly throughout space, but your microwave oven produces concentrated, high-amplitude, low-frequency microwaves and can heat up your lunch. can heat up your lunch.

Light wave concentration is another determinant of light energy, that is particularly relevant to the expansion of the universe. The energy density of beams of light in lumens also depends in part on the concentration of light and is reduced by the square of distance from the source, an inverse square

law similar to that of gravity. The sun’s rays are much hotter because of greater concentration as they leave its surface than after they have spatially dispersed with distance, including that due to space expansion, by the inverse square law.

The implication that things have been getting steadily colder would seem reasonable, if one could assume that all the energy that the universe has ever contained had come from a hot “Big Bang,” with no additional energy being added ever since (see 4.2). Under those conditions, energy density should have indeed been diluted by increased wave lengths as well as distance.

However, this model suggests that space addition adds energy to our dimensions. If space expansion has provided an energy boost, there could be one or more entropy-reducing effects. There should be little objection to the idea that if the light from existing stars becomes more intense, and if new stars are created that pour more heat into our dimensions, those phenomena should tend to decrease entropy or reduce its increase. The model suggests that those very things could result from space expansion.

As existing light waves traveled toward us from distant galaxies, space expansion could do more than just increase wave lengths. The expansion could produce kinetic energy. The recession of matter and hence of masses from each other at the Hubble velocity (see 3.2) would involve the new “volons” impacting and displacing existing ones. In this model, recession due to space expansion is “real” motion. Since that recession of masses accelerates as its velocity increases with distance (let alone that the expansion itself is accelerating),, it would seem to fulfill the classical definition of a force, mass*acceleration. Applying that force over distance would fulfill the classical definition of energy and work, force*distance. It may have been assumed that when material objects are being

pushed outward and away from each other in all directions, they will not impact one another, but since the “volons” being inserted would impact other “volons,” they could indirectly affect matter motion.

The force of expansion could be a factor in the creation of spatial pressure (see 5.1). which in turn could produce mechanical (e.g., gravitational) and thermal energy. However, if spatial pressure increases, it is apparently counter-balanced so that net pressure can remain stable. As already suggested (see 4.4), the impact of “volons” on one another might also speculatively produce vortices capable of generating new matter.

Atoms excited by the kinetic energy could experience electrons jumping to higher orbitals. When those electrons returned to lower orbitals, they would give off new light waves (see 7.1), some of which might have higher amplitude than ambient light. New waves would increase energy density via wave wave concentration, adding to light from extremely distant sources. As in black body radiation, however, the wave lengths would likely be longer than visible light, because atoms in space that were not in stars would not be expected to reach high temperatures. With further space expansion, some of these new electromagnetic waves might reach the microwave frequency range, and be interpreted as the CMB (see 4.2).

During our current expansion of the universe, there is some evidence suggesting that its thermal content may be increasing, not decreasing. Chiang, et al. (2020) reported that the temperature of galaxy clusters has actually risen about tenfold over the past 10 billion years of expansion. The authors suggested that this might be due to the gravitational collapse of “dark matter” and gases to

create new galaxies (M. Williams 2020), perhaps an example of energy redistribution and conservation.

Astronomers working with the James Webb Space Telescope have also discovered that light from the most distant galaxies is much brighter than expected. This is the light that has had the most travel time through expanding space. That finding has been such a surprise that it has raised doubts about the lambda-CDM model (see 4.1) and even about the “Big Bang” (Catanzaro 2023; Malewar 2024). The presumption has been that the earliest galaxies were more massive than thought possible, but the suggestion here is that some of the brightness might be generated by space expansion.

There is also evidence that many new stars are being created in some regions, which should produce significant amounts of new heat and other energy. This is occurring particularly within nebulae referred to as “stellar nurseries,” including the Orion and Eagle nebulae within our galaxy, in which gravity is presumably coalescing gases (Lamb & Henderson 2023). Over recent decades, much research has been done one the lifecycles of stars, but more work should be done to estimate the ratio of star deaths to new star births.

Such kinetic and electromagnetic effects could limit the cooling effect of the expansion.
Outer space is currently very cold, but the beginning of expansion in our dimensions was not necessarily as hot as is assumed in the “Big Bang” theory.

The idea that space expansion could introduce new energy raises questions about conservation of energy. There is already recognition among physicists that “dark energy” is an exception to conservation of energy (Cartlidge 2017). The energy conservation question is neither unique to nor created by this model, which only seeks to help explain it. In this model, total energy (sum of kinetic

and potential) would be conserved within the total closed system of the visible and alternate invisible dimensions combined. This could be considered analogous to a Hamiltonian (Hirvonen 2024-a). Energy could be moved in the form of “volon” exchanges from one set of dimensions to the other. Once in a given set of dimensions, energy would be conserved there except for further inter-dimensional exchanges. General relativity is claimed by some to only require local energy conservation (Hossenfelder 2019).

10.4 Probably So


In any localized area, statistical probability can determine whether entropy increases or decreases, as Maxwell insightfully recognized (Siegfried 2024). The second law may be basically a manifestation of that probability, which is in turn dependent on a number of factors, including initial states of order and their disturbances, the volume of space available for dispersal, ambient conditions affecting entropy including gravitation and expansion, and the attractive and repulsive properties of materials present. We are located in a highly ordered environment to start with, due to entropy having been decreased, mostly by gravity, when our earth and solar system were formed. There is a lot of space around us, full of “volons” but with fewer waves, for redistribution of matter, and there are many ways and potential states in which things that are already assembled here can break apart, separate, or cool down. As a result, it is not surprising if our common experience is of entropy increasing.

If we were to take a box with plenty of available space, containing an organized structure made of matter such as a tower of blocks, as our initial state, and were to shake it so that it broke apart, entropy would increase. A box full of electrons repelling one another would likewise tend toward maximum separation and entropy.

On the other hand, if we were to start with tiny floating magnetized specks of iron, in a box of similar size, and were to use the same amount of energy to shake the box, the units would tend to clump to some extent due to their attraction for one another, negating any expectation of increased entropy. And if there were a strong bipolar magnet in the box, alignment and attachment of the small magnets to the large one and to each other would likely be greater and there would be stronger evidence that entropy had decreased. Similarly, if we were to have a box with some naked protons and allowed a stream of electrons to flow in (both part of a closed though initially polarized system), they would join together into hydrogen molecules, likewise reducing entropy. Once they were both in the box, no additional energy would have needed to be applied.

In summary, in the entire experience of our lives, time has been unidirectional. Astronomical evidence suggests that the expansion of the universe has likewise been consistently unidirectional for a long duration. Unidirectional thermodynamics with a statistical tendency toward an increase in entropy is also common (though not ubiquitous) in our experience. However, these “arrows” do not necessarily apply to all localities and conditions, or to the extreme long term future of the universe.

CONCLUSIONS

Starting with the logical train of thought introduced at the start of this article, and following through step by step in the subsequent sections, a new “Waves of Space” model of the universe has been developed. The aim has been to propose an alternative way of conceptualizing the physical world, with a more seamless system in which the basic composition of the universe is responsible for its processes, and each phenomenon explains others in a way that can be followed by human reasoning. This model should help make some phenomena more comprehensible, which have been

previously described and incorporated into equations, but have never been adequately explained before in terms of mechanisms or in relation to other known phenomena. Everyone is invited to explore this conceptualization, including those theoretical physicists, astronomers, mathematicians, philosophers of science, students in all those fields, and lay persons from other occupations who dare to think slightly “outside the box.”

The following conclusions are some but not all of the hypotheses presented in this article. For those that seem difficult to accept or do not resonate, referral to the appropriate sections of the article is recommended, using the contents list for reference or searching for key words.

The “Fundamental Principle”: Space is the ultimate material of the universe, and is the medium of fields and of the transmission of gravity and of electromagnetic waves. This is the underlying cause of the remaining conclusions. Postulating any additional fundamental substances complicates theoretical physics unnecessarily. Space is proposed to be quantized and made up of discrete, “real,” universal units, which nevertheless can be added and deleted. The name “volons” has been tentatively assigned to such units of space, and group action by “volons” to create waves has been termed “volon mechanics.” This concept is also important with respect to motion, in which groups of “volons” pass by and displace other “volons.” Motion of matter is “real,” and faster motion should be distinguishable from slower. Nevertheless, any motion is also relative in that it must be detected and measured relative to other objects.
The Hubble expansion of the universe is best explained by the addition of tiny units of space in-between those of existing space, which supports space being a substance. This occurs everywhere but is opposed by the local space deletions of gravity. The expansion exceeds those

deletions except in locations close to high concentrations of matter, where more units of space are being deleted than added. When new space is added to existing space, objects appear to recede from one another. Because matter occupies only a small amount of the universe, gravity does not prevent the expansion from being predominant and relatively homogeneous. When units of space are added to one set of dimensions, they are suggested to be coming from deletions in the hidden set of other dimensions. In this model, three dimensions in each set are considered to be adequate for computations, because time is considered as a function of space rather than as a fourth dimension.
Gravitation is explained by the deletion of units of space (“volons”) by mass. Only units that actually come in contact with mass can be deleted. When units of space are deleted, they are thought to be transferred from our dimensions to the alternate set. This deletion results in an in-flow of surrounding units of space toward the mass to replace the deleted units, propelled by external spatial pressure, which is higher than the pressure around the mass where space has been deleted. The mechanism involves a cascade in which the “volons” closest to the mass are pushed into it, while other “volons” are pushed in to replace those “volons,” the next adjacent “volons” replace those “volons,” and so on. Deletion of space and in-flow of replacement space toward mass reduces the distances to other masses or light, or serves as a centripetal force for orbits or bent pathways. Although the term mass is often used as a synonym for matter, for purposes of this model, mass can alternatively be thought of as one of the main wave properties of matter, which either causes or regulates space deletion, and therefore is the key to gravity and also to inertia.

Matter at theoretical rest (a term used because there is no absolute rest) can be thought of as having a spherical “shell” at each radius, a single “volon” thick. The volume of each shell is the surface area of its sphere*one volon of radius thickness. The amount of space removed per time from each “shell” is the same, but as the effects propagate out to greater distances, the spheres’ surfaces become larger and the deleted space becomes a smaller fraction of the total volume of each successive shell. Because the area of a sphere is 4*πr2, which includes the square of the radius, gravitation is diluted by the square of distance from the center of gravity, an explanation for the inverse square law of gravity.
The gravitational field around every mass produces size reduction and time dilation in matter by a mechanism different from general relativity. In small bodies of matter in the gravitational field of a larger body, some external “volons” flow into the small body and “volons” also flow out toward the attracting mass. Some of the “volons” that flow in are deleted by the mass of the small body itself, and some are used to reconstruct matter waves depleted of “volons.” The rate of restoration of space in the small body is slower than the rate of out-flow, at least partly because the restoration incorporates an element of wave reconstruction that should be proportional to the volume of matter needing reconstruction. That should be inversely proportional to the cube of the radius because volume is	, whereas the space outflow should be related to the inverse square. These effects are negligible except in very high gravitation at short distances, at which they cause a three-dimensional reduction in the size of matter in the “shells” around the mass. Deletion of space already traversed by clock hands would set the hands back and result in dilation of time, as well as being a balancing force in inertia. Explanations by the

model for size reduction and time dilation by gravity are consistent with general relativity, and supply mechanisms missing from both relativity theories.
It has been assumed for over 100 years that gravitational information travels at the speed of light, but this model develops mechanisms and proposes that gravitational fields propagate through space in a wave-like manner. Each “shell” of space around a mass would alternately lose and regain units of space, an oscillation of circumference and radius that would be transmitted throughout the gravitational field, limited by the speed of light. The traveling oscillations would constitute waves of gravitational effects, labelled here as “gravitational field waves.” These are not currently recognized in physics, but would explain known phenomena and are worthy of study.
There are factors tending to accelerate the expansion of space, currently thought of as “dark energy.” The most obvious is that the more new space is added, the more that new space increases the velocity of recession, in accordance with the Hubble equation (v=H0*s) which itself implies exponential acceleration. Currently, there is a net acceleration, but it is not exponential. Several other factors have been identified that could accelerate and decelerate the expansion, and the current acceleration may represent a balance of these.
The properties of matter and of most energy may be accounted for by oscillating disturbances within the space medium. These include the wave functions (the “Waves of Space,” quantum and other) associated with so-called sub-atomic particles, complemented by effects of space addition and deletion, vibration, and other processes in space.

The gravitational field of a moving object would be redistributed, causing gravitational “pull” toward the object to be greatest immediately in front, weakest behind, and “normal” and intermediate from the sides, above, and below. Experiments should test whether overall gravitational “pull” increases with motion, which is relevant to the issue of “relativistic mass.” Non-uniformity of the gravitational field might also be testable by comparisons of gravitational bending of light in front of and behind rapidly moving stars. There are several types of motion of matter, generated differently, e.g., by space addition, space deletion, mechanical wave oscillation, elastic displacement, electromagnetism, and common mechanics. In all types, at ordinary velocities and gravity, matter in motion retains its structural integrity. Linear motion requires the transfer of “volons” in front of the moving material object to the rear, to make room for the transfer of location of the object. This transfer sets off “space displacement waves,” just as motion in air or water creates wakes.
The inertia of uniform linear motion (Newton’s first law) at normal velocities could result from a balance of space deletions. The moving object should experience more concentrated space deletion from its own gravitation in front in the direction of the motion than behind it. Because of this minute difference in space deletion, spatial pressure would be greater from behind,