gravitation “evoked a lively sense of discomfort among Newton's contemporaries, because it seemed to be in conflict with the principle springing from the rest of experience, that there can be reciprocal action only through contact, and not through immediate action at a distance.
It is only with reluctance that man's desire for knowledge endures a dualism of this kind. How was unity to be preserved in his comprehension of the forces of nature? Either by trying to look upon contact forces as being themselves distant forces which admittedly are observable only at a very small distance and this was the road which Newton's followers, who were entirely under the spell of his doctrine, mostly preferred to take; or by assuming that the Newtonian action at a distance is only apparently immediate action at a distance, but in truth is conveyed by a medium permeating space [underlined by me], whether by movements or by elastic deformation of this medium. Thus the endeavor toward a unified view of the

nature of forces leads to the hypothesis of an ether. This hypothesis, to be sure, did not at first bring with it any advance in the theory of gravitation or in physics generally, so that it became customary to treat Newton's law of force as an axiom not further reducible. But the ether hypothesis was bound always to play some part in physical science, even if at first only a latent part.”

The rejection of the luminiferous ether
And about the second item, and after recalling the “wonderful simplification of theoretical principles” made by H.A. Lorentz, who “succeeded in reducing all electromagnetic happenings to Maxwell’s equations for free space” he recalls the debate that accompanied the special theory of relativity and led to the rejection of the idea of a luminiferous ether:
“The ether does not exist at all. The electromagnetic fields are not states of a medium, and are not bound down by any bearer, but they are independent realities which are not reducible to anything else, exactly like the atoms of ponderable matter. This conception suggests itself the more reality as, according to Lorentz’s theory, electromagnetic radiation, like ponderable matter, brings impulse and energy with it, and as, according to the special theory of relativity, both matter and radiation are but special forms of distributed energy, ponderable mass losing its isolation and appearing as a special form of energy.”
He notes however that a more careful reflection teaches us
“that the special theory of relativity does not compel us to deny ether. We may assume the existence of an ether, only we must give up ascribing a definite state of motion to it, i.e. we must by abstraction take from it the last mechanical characteristic which Lorentz had still left it. We shall see later that this point of view, the conceivability of which shall at once endeavor to make more intelligible by a somewhat halting comparison, is justified by the results of the general theory of relativity [underlined by me]. (…) [Actually] there is a weighty argument to be adduced in favor of the ether hypothesis. To deny the ether is ultimately to assign that empty space has no physical qualities whatever. The fundamental facts of mechanics do not harmonize with this view. For the mechanical behavior of a corporeal system hovering freely in empty space depends not only on relative positions (distances) and relative velocities, but also on its state of rotation, [underlined by me] which physically may be taken as a characteristic not appertaining to the system in itself. In order to be able to look upon the rotation of the system, at least formally, as something real, Newton objectivizes space. Since he classes his absolute space together with real things, for him rotation relative to an absolute space is also something real. Newton might no less well have called his absolute space ``Ether''; what is essential is merely that besides observable objects, another thing, which is not perceptible, must be looked upon as real, to enable acceleration or rotation to be looked upon as something real [underlined by me].”

The Mach’s ether
Then comes the reference to the “Mach’s way of thinking”
“It is true that Mach tried to avoid having to accept as real something which is not observable by endeavoring to substitute in mechanics a mean acceleration with reference to the totality of the masses in the universe in place of an acceleration with reference to absolute space. But inertial resistance opposed to relative acceleration of distant masses presupposes action at a distance; and as the modern physicist

does not believe that he may accept this action at a distance, he comes back once more, if he follows Mach, to the ether, which has to serve as medium for the effects of inertia [underlined by me]. But this conception of the ether to which we are led by Mach's way of thinking differs essentially from the ether as conceived by Newton, by Fresnel, and by Lorentz. Mach's ether not only conditions the behavior of inert masses, but is also conditioned in its state by them [underlined by me].
“Mach's idea finds its full development in the ether of the general theory of relativity. According to this theory the metrical qualities of the continuum of space-time differ in the environment of different points of space-time, and are partly conditioned by the matter existing outside of the territory under consideration. This space-time variability of the reciprocal relations of the standards of space and time, or, perhaps, the recognition of the fact that ``empty space'' in its physical relation is neither homogeneous nor isotropic, compelling us to describe its state by ten functions (the gravitation potentials g), has, I think, finally disposed of the view that space is physically empty. But therewith the conception of the ether has again acquired an intelligible content, although this content differs widely from that of the ether of the mechanical undulatory theory of light. The ether of the general theory of relativity is a medium which is itself devoid of all mechanical and kinematical qualities, but helps to determine mechanical (and electromagnetic) events [underlined by me].”
But Einstein notes that there is a fundamental difference between the gravitational field and the electromagnetic fields from the standpoint of the ether hypothesis:
“There can be no space nor any part of space without gravitational potentials; for these confer upon space its metrical qualities, without which it cannot be imagined at all. The existence of the gravitational field is inseparably bound up with the existence of space [underlined by me]. On the other hand a part of space may very well be imagined without an electromagnetic field; thus in contrast with the gravitational field, the electromagnetic field seems to be only secondarily linked to the ether, the formal nature of the electromagnetic field being as yet in no way determined by that of gravitational ether. From the present state of theory it looks as if the electromagnetic field, as opposed to the gravitational field, rests upon an entirely new formal motif, as though nature might just as well have endowed the gravitational ether with fields of quite another type, for example, with fields of a scalar potential [underlined by me], instead of fields of the electromagnetic type.”

The program of the ether/matter unification
“Since according to our present conceptions the elementary particles of matter are also, in their essence, nothing else than condensations of the electromagnetic field, our present view of the universe presents two realities which are completely separated from each other conceptually, although connected causally, namely, gravitational ether and electromagnetic field, or as they might also be called space and matter.”
The lack, in the beginning of the 20th century of any theory of the constituents of matter, apart from the electromagnetic interaction, explains why the unification of gravitation and electromagnetism became the main research program of Einstein, the achievement of which would be that

“for the first time the epoch of theoretical physics founded by Faraday and Maxwell would reach a satisfactory conclusion. The contrast between ether and matter would fade away, and, through the general theory of relativity, the whole of physics would become a complete system of thought, like geometry, kinematics, and the theory of gravitation.”
However, Einstein expresses the fear he had that quantum physics could raise unsurmountable obstacles to such a program:
“in contemplating the immediate future of theoretical physics we ought not unconditionally to reject the possibility that the facts comprised in the quantum theory may set bounds to the field theory beyond which it cannot pass.”
Also, Einstein, who at that time was still believing in a static universe, thought that although “according to the general theory of relativity space without ether is unthinkable [underlined by me] (…) the idea of motion may not be applied to ether”.
3/ Dark matter and cosmological constant issues
The new cosmological standard model, called CDM, for Lambda, the usual denomination of the cosmological constant (CC), Cold Dark Matter, also called the “Concordance’ cosmology, because it puts in concordance the implications of different methods of observation (the supernovae, the CMB and the modelling of baryon acoustic oscillations) led to a solution of the two problems that were plaguing the so-called simple big bang cosmological model. These two problems are, on the one hand, the too high homogeneity on the full sky of the observed cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation and the observed approximate vanishing of the spatial curvature which implies, if it is not rigorously exact, an unacceptable fine tuning of the components of the energy density content in the early universe, on the other hand. The recent progresses of observational cosmology that began with the COBE satellite, continued through the WMAP experiment and culminates with the Planck results, led to solving the two problems by validating the so-called inflation scenario that was imagined in the Seventies but was hitherto considered as purely speculative. These progresses in observational cosmology provide a remarkably robust evidence about two facts that we consider as the two granted major assets of CDM, namely the existence of a non-vanishing cosmological constant , and the vanishing of k, the spatial curvature.
However CDM raises new problems of which the most important is the fact that about 95% of the matter content of the universe is not understood by means of the standard model of the microscopic structure of matter: apart from the baryonic matter representing 4.9% of this content, and possibly describable in terms of standard model physics, two components seem to challenge all known physical theories: the dark energy (68.3% of the content) and the

dark matter (26.8% of the content). If  is indeed the cosmological constant it induces through its equation of state a pressure and a density equal in magnitude but of opposite signs, and it can explain the dark energy component. However even in this case, there remains with respect to CC the problem of its value which contradicts all the estimates based on various arguments about the vacuum energy density which it is supposed to account for. Also there remains the problem of dark matter to which is devoted the rest of the present paper.
The assets of the CDM cosmological model
In this section, we shall adopt the definitions, notations and conventions of reference
[2] that we briefly recall.
The Einstein equation
The starting point of cosmology is the Einstein’s equation, in which the cosmological constant term is taken to the right side and interpreted as an effective energy momentum tensor
g / 8GN (GN is the Newton’s constant, c, the light velocity put to 1) proportional to the


metric field for the vacuum


 g


(1)


A very important remark is in order about this interpretation: originally, the cosmological term is in the left side of the Einstein’s equation; taking it in the right side, the one of the matter source, and interpreting it as an energy momentum tensor proportional to the metric field for the vacuum, implies that this “vacuum” is to be interpreted, as we said above, as an ether rather than as empty space. With this interpretation, dark energy, the contribution related to the cosmological constant, can be interpreted as a part of the Mach’s ether. We shall come back to this point below.
The Robertson-Walker metric
The Robertson-Walker metric allows to describe a homogenous and isotropic universe compatible with the Einstein’s equation in terms of two cosmological parameters: the spatial curvature index k, an integer equal to -1, 0 or +1 and the overall dimensional expansion (or contraction) radius of the universe R(t) , depending only on time; note that due to the
homogeneity, the geometry actually does not depend on the radial relative coordinate r which is dimensionless:

2	2	2
 dr2
2	2	2	2 

ds  dt
 R (t) 1 kr
 r d
 sin
 d 

(2)

One often uses a dimensionless scale factor a(t)  R(t) / R0 where R0  R(t0 ) is the radius at present-day.
In order to derive the Friedman-Lemaître equations of motion, one assumes that the matter content of the universe is a perfect fluid for which the energy momentum tensor is expressed in terms of the isotropic pressure p, the energy density  the space time metric g described in equation (2) and of the velocity vector u  1, 0, 0, 0 for the isotropic fluid in co-moving coordinates

T
  pg   p   uu
(3)

Which leads to the Friedman-Lemaître equations in terms of the Hubble parameter H
 R 2	8 G 	k	

H 2  	  	N   	
(4)


And
 R 
R	3	3
3	R2	3
   3 p



(5)

Energy conservation (via T 
 0 ) leads to a third equation:
  3H   p


(6)

Equation (4) can be given a simple ‘Minkowskian’ interpretation (in ref.[2], it is said “Newtonian”): interpreting –k/R2 as the total energy, the cosmic evolution can be seen as resulting from the competition between a negative potential energy (gravitational) and the kinetic energy. If k  0 , as such is the case in CDM, then, according to this interpretation, the total energy is equal to zero.
Equation of state of the components of the universe
In terms of the equation of state parameter w  p /  , eq.(6) can be written as
  3(1 w)R / R that can be integrated as a general equation of state
  R3(1w) ,	(7)
Which allows determining the time dependence of the expansion radius R(t) according to the
component that dominates the evolution at a given epoch. At early times, when R is small, the less singular term k / R2 in equation (4) can be neglected as long as w  1/ 3 . For w  1 and neglecting the curvature and CC terms, equation (4) can be integrated to yield
R(t)  t2/3(1w) ,	(8)

Which allows attributing the standard time dependences of the expansion radius, namely
w  1/ 3;   R4; R(t)  t1/2; H  1/ 2t ,	(9) For a radiation-dominated universe,

w  0;   R3; R(t)  t2/3; H  2 / 3t
For a matter-dominated universe and
(10)

w  1; R(t)  e /3t For a universe dominated by the cosmological constant. The three phases of the CDM cosmology
,	(11)

According to CDM, the cosmic evolution involves three distinct phases namely
A primeval inflation phase occurring at an energy of about 1016 GeV, during which the Hubble radius is constant (about 103 Planck lengths) whereas the scale factor grows exponentially by about thirty orders of magnitude, so that we can assume that at the end of  inflation,  the  spatial  curvature  index  k  is  compatible  with  zero
  k / R2 H 2  0.00080.0040  . This primeval inflation phase replaces the big bang
singularity that actually was the cause of the two problems plaguing the old standard model of cosmology;
An expansion phase during which the content of the universe obeys the standard Friedman-Lemaître cosmological equations of motion, with an epoch of dominance of radiation ( L  a2 )followed by an epoch of dominance of matter ( L  a1.5 )
A late inflation phase driven by the cosmological constant  w  1.0190.075 [3] .
Definition of the cosmological density parameters

In eq.(4), the density such that k = 0 when  0 is called the critical density:


c 
3H 2
8 GN

.	(12)

For a given component of the content of the universe, labelled by index i, one defines the cosmological density parameter
   /  ,	(13)
In terms of which one can rewrite eq.(4) as

k / R2  H 2      1
(14)

0	0	m	r	

Where	    / 3H 2 represents, according of the interpretation of CC in eq.(1), the
cosmological density parameter of the vacuum (or the ether), the subscript 0 indicates present-day values, the subscript m refers to matter and the subscript r refers to relativistic particles.
Observational evidence for dark matter
Actually dark matter is a long standing problem in astrophysics, related to the rotation curves of stars in galaxies and galaxies in clusters which show rotation velocities that are almost independent of the distance at large distances. This feature led to the assumption of an unknown component of matter, acting only gravitationally in a way comparable with Mach’s ether, compensating the centrifugal (inertial!) force which tends to disperse the components of the rotating system. This component is qualified as dark because it seems invisible. This dark matter does not prevent the propagation of light nor the motion of matter. But it seems to modify the propagation of light through the effect of gravitational lensing. Systematic use of this gravitational lensing effect has allowed producing a full sky map of the dark matter [4]. Dark matter seems to spread all over the full sky, being rather concentrated in the halos of the clusters. Also, it appears that in collisions of clusters, dark matter follows inertially the motions of the colliding clusters.
The flatness sum rule
The existence of an important dark matter component of the universe is definitely confirmed in CDM. Such a contribution is called cold dark matter because, it appears to be non-relativistic. Dark matter seems to be well constrained by the concordance of the observations of the CMB, of the baryonic acoustic oscillations, and of the super novae (very sensitive to CC). If, on the concordance diagram, one draws the straight line representing the flatness sum rule that translates the vanishing of the spatial curvature it goes remarkably well through the blob of best fit of all data with a dark matter component amounting to more than five times the baryonic matter. It is now a common practice to call the sum of baryonic and dark matter densities the matter density (       ).
Putting k to zero in eq.(14), and rewriting it in terms of the densities, and assuming that  is indeed a cosmological constant with an equation of state w  1, leading to the vacuum
energy density   / 8 GN we write the flatness sum rule as:
        0 ,	(15)
Which translates the conservation of total energy with CC playing the role of an integration constant.

The cosmological constant issue
The cosmological constant as an integration constant
Actually, this way of interpreting the energy conservation sum rule corresponds to the one adopted by Georges Lemaître in his debate with Einstein about the cosmological constant [5]:
“Newtonian gravitation depends on the mass (through the density ) and it produces on the planets a definite acceleration proportional to the attractive mass. Mass is but a form of energy and any form of energy has to be counted as mass. But energy essentially contains an arbitrary constant; it can be counted from a zero level which can be chosen arbitrarily. Therefore, if gravitational mass, which has a definite effect, viz., the Newtonian attraction, must be identified with energy, which is defined but for an additive arbitrary constant, it is necessary that the theory should provide some possibility of adjustment when the zero level from which energy is counted is changed arbitrarily. Poisson’s equation in its original form does not meet this requirement; but in the modified equation the density comes out as   0 only. The arbitrary change of  arising from the change of zero level, can then be compensated by an equivalent change in the unknown 0 or in lambda. In this way, no modification results in the gravitational attraction.”
The holographic equipartition principle of T. Padmanabhan
Now it turns out that this interpretation of CC as an integration constant has been put on a very solid theoretical ground by T. Padmanabhan in works he has performed for more than fifteen years and published in scores of papers. One of the leitmotiv of his approach is that [6] “The key new ingredient arises from the fact that properties of the vacuum state depends on the scale at
which it is probed and it is not appropriate to ask questions without specifying this scale. If the spacetime has a cosmological horizon which blocks information, the natural scale is provided by the size of the horizon, L and we should use observables defined within the accessible region.”
Which implies that, once the presence of horizons is taken into account, vacuum fluctuations of energy density can lead to the observed cosmological constant [7]. The very simple argument used for this statement deserves to be reproduced here: in the two regions 1 and 2, separated by
a horizon and described by a Hamiltonian H  H1  H2	the dispersions in the energies
E 2  0 H  E 2 0	and E 2  0 H  E 2 0	are equal because the expectation
1	1	1	2	2	2
values of  H  E  and  H  E 2 vanish in any energy eigenstate; but since the two regions only share the bounding surface, the two dispersions have to be proportional to the area of the surface, and thus to scale as the square of the radius of the horizon. So the fluctuation of the
density 	 E / L3 scales as the inverse surface area, 	  L L 2  H 2 / G	which

vac	H

is compatible with the observed value of CC.
vac	P  H	N

However, the author notes that this argument, although suggestive “leaves significant scope for improvement – not in the least because one is dealing with formally divergent quantities.” That is why he uses an alternative way of presenting the argument. The Hamiltonian, limited to the region bounded by a cosmological horizon, exhibits energy
fluctuations E because the vacuum state is not an eigenstate of this operator. Now these
fluctuations in the energy density   E  / L3 depend on both the ultraviolet cutoff and on
LH . Now, when used as the source of gravity, this  should lead, in a sort of a “bootstrap”,
to a spacetime with the horizon size LH playing the role of an infrared cutoff in the computation
of  , allowing to get rid of the contribution of the mean density, and leading to the
   LP LH 2 scaling law. On the whole, if this argument holds true it means that any energy
density, with this scaling law, that can be interpreted in terms of vacuum energy density, has to be attributed to the fluctuations of the density and not to its mean value.
In a more recent work which synthesizes his whole work on the subject, and which gives a full justification of the argument discussed just above, T. Padmanabhan proposes a reformulation, ab initio, of general relativity from a thermodynamic perspective [8] from which he derives a series of very important results related to the concept of holography interpreted as “the deep inter-relationship between gravitational dynamics and horizon thermodynamics”. From this work, I retainb the fact that “when the equations of motion hold, the total energy of the gravity plus matter system in a bulk region is equal to the boundary heat content.” Which means that the total energy density (including the vacuum energy density) scales as the boundary heat content, that is as the inverse of the area of the bounding surface. In my opinion, this feature is enough to solve the CC problem [9] because it means that the gravity induced by the bulk vacuum energy does not come from its mean density but only from the fluctuations: if such is the case, we understand
Why the cosmological constant has a value that is as small as the observed one, and
Why the vacuum energy density depends on the cosmic time since it scales as the inverse of the area of the Hubble horizon, which of course depends on time: how Weinberg says in [9] “We want to explain why the effective cosmological constant is small now, not why it was always small.” In other words, the observed small value of CC is not the result of an unacceptable fine-tuning, but simply the present-day value of a running effective cosmological “constant”, the running being driven by the Friedman-

b For the moment, because I will come back to it in a work in preparation.

Lemaître equations, in the same way as the running of the strong fine structure “constant”  (Q2 ) in driven by the renormalization group equations of QCD. In fact, at the end of the primeval inflation phase the effective cosmological constant is large and positive, and it has to be compensated by a negative contribution induced by another component of the vacuum energy, decreasing in absolute value along the cosmic evolution driven by the Friedman equations, in order to reach its small present-day value.
Moreover, we understand why the “vacuum” which has gravitational or cosmological effects, namely that can be considered as a part of an ether, is necessarily a quantum vacuum, because it is in the framework of quantum fields theory that the fields in the ground state fluctuate. Actually, in a 2008 article [10] Padmanabhan noted that “any observed value of the cosmological constant has to be necessarily a quantum phenomenon arising as a relic of microscopic spacetime fluctuations;”
4/ Quantum vacuum as Mach’s ether
In his work, Padmanabhan did not address the dark matter issue, he left it to particle physics, and what I want to do now is to explore the possibility of extending his approach to the dark matter issue. I am encouraged to do it because if it is the quantum nature of spacetime geometry fluctuations that leads to a small cosmological constant at the origin of dark energy, then, a fortiori one can expect that the fluctuations of the quantum fields of the particle physics standard model have all the reasons to contribute also to the vacuum energy. I thus assume that the vacuum has two componentsc, one coming from the quantum fluctuations of the spacetime geometry (or of quantum gravity) leading to dark energy, and one coming from the fluctuations of the quantum fields of the standard model, in particular those of QCD, possibly leading to dark matter.
Confinement in QCD
I first concentrate on QCD because it is an unbroken non abelian renormalisable gauge theory, which is asymptotically free at short distance, and singular at large distance. This

c Such an assumption is not common in the literature, but since the vacuum is not the nothingness, but is rather a medium, which has not to be unique, I think it is legitimate: “From which one can see that there is as much difference between nothingness and empty space, as between empty space and matter; and that empty space holds the middle between matter and nothingness. That is why the maxim of Aristoteles you are talking about, ‘that the non-beings are not differing’ applies only to the nothingness” Blaise Pascal, answer to rev. father Noël, Paris, on October 29th 1647 (oeuvres completes, p. 384)

behavior at large distance is believed to be the key to the understanding of color confinement, and also for the possibility of cosmological implications. Quantum radiative corrections involve quantum fluctuations represented by Feynman diagrams involving quark and gluon loops, contributing to the polarization of the vacuum. Now, contrary to quantum electrodynamics (QED) for which the gauge field, the photon, is neutral, the gluon is color charged and gluon loops produce an anti-screening effect which overpass the screening effect induced by quark loops. On the whole, the fluctuations of the QCD fields make of the QCD vacuum a medium that repels the chromo-electric field, what T. D. Lee calls a “perfect color diaelectric” [11] in the same way as a QED superconductor, a “perfect diamagnetic”, repels the magnetic field. It would cost an infinite amount of energy to put an isolated color charge (a quark or a gluon) inside such a medium. However a color singlet hadron (a quark-antiquark meson, a three quark baryon or a gluonium) can create in the medium a cavity in which the mass energy of the hadron would equilibrate the pressure of the external medium. Let us note that this pressure exerted by the QCD vacuum has a sign opposite to the one equivalent to the dark energy: the spacetime in which live quarks and gluons is an anti-de Sitter (AdS) rather than a de Sitter spacetime, corresponding to a negative effective cosmological constant (see item 2 in paragraph 3.3). In the seventies the hadronic string heuristic model picturing hadrons as open strings the end points of which are confined quarks or antiquarks provided a hint toward a sub-hadronic confining theory. When QCD was discovered, this picture became more ambitious following the work of G. ‘t Hooft [12] who conjectured that at the limit when the
number of colors Nc goes to infinity with  fixed g 2 N	(g2 being the squared of the QCD
coupling constant), QCD confines quarks and antiquarks as the end points of color singlet hadronic strings: if one tries to separate the quark and the antiquark by rotating a meson at high speed, they will remain attached by a color flux tube acting as a string, the tension of which is a universal constant of the hadronic world, the amount of energy per unit of length necessary for compensating the centrifugal forced. A string tension of about 1 GeV2 is favored by the phenomenology of soft hadronic reactions and by lattice gauge simulations.
Conformal anomaly
On a more quantitative ground, the properties of the QCD vacuum have been thoroughly studied. The QCD Lagrangian, without quarks or with massless quarks (in the so-called chiral limit), is scale invariant since the coupling constant is dimensionless. But through

d Is that not similar to the effect of dark matter compensating the centrifugal force in the rotation of stars in galaxies and galaxies in clusters?!

quantization, this symmetry is broken, one says that it is dynamically broken: this phenomenon is called conformal (or trace) anomaly, because even if the trace of the energy-momentum tensor vanishes classically in QCD at the chiral limit, it becomes different from zero through quantization of the theory.
The dynamical breaking of scale invariance is apparent in the fact that “the renormalization has replaced a one-parameter family of unrenormalized theories, characterized
by their values of the dimensionless unrenormalized gauge coupling, g0 , by a one-parameter
family of renormalized theories, characterized by their value of the dimension-one [renormalization group invariant] scale mass  (g, ) ”[13]. This scale mass, independent of the energy  at which renormalization is performed, appears as a non-vanishing trace of the renormalized energy-momentum tensor; it is completely physical; it is related to the hadron masses or to the above mentioned string tension; but, and this is the main point of our proposal, it does have cosmological implications.
QCD in the cosmological context
Conformally flat cosmologies
All cosmologies which are homogeneous and isotropic are said to be conformally flat, which means that the metric is Minkowskian up to a multiplicative factor related to its
determinant g which is the part of the metric tensor that is relevant in cosmology


ds2  f (x) ds 2	; g
Minkowski
 f 4
g
Minkowski
.	(16)

Now, since the determinant is just a function depending of the spacetime point, it can be replaced by a scalar field, called the dilaton, and cosmology can be studied in a Minkowski spacetime, i.e. in a flat spacetime. This possibility has been used by Gürsey [14] who has proposed a reformulation of general relativity in accordance with Mach’s principle (again the Mach’s way of thinking!): according to this reformulation, the metric tensor is factorized into a scalar density and a tensor density with unit determinant. The scalar density describes the cosmological structure whereas the tensor density refers to gravitational phenomena. On the other hand, the possibility offered by conformally flat cosmologies has been used by R. Brout,
F. Englert and E. Gunzig (BEG) to propose a model in which “quantum creation of massy particles can occur in the cosmological context without cost of energy” [15], a model that turned out to be quite compatible with the primeval inflation phase of the CDM model. In the BEG model, the field associated with the determinant of the metric gives an unconventional negative energy density, such that, “matter –carrying positive energy– can be created, yet the

total Minkowskian energy kept fixed and equal to that of empty space.” By the way, they show that despite this unconventional negative density, their model is perfectly compatible with general relativity, since through a Weyl transformation (a rescaling of the metric and the matter fields) that is analogous to the transformation to a unitary gauge in the BEH (Brout Englert Higgs) mechanism in electroweak symmetry breaking, the ghost that appears in the Minkowski action is cancelled in the generally covariant action.
The dilaton as the Nambu-Goldstone boson of spontaneous scale invariance breaking
In QCD, neglecting the quark contribution, this trace is related to the renormalized gluon condensate, or gluon pairing amplitude:

T 	
 (g) Fi
Fi r
(17)

  0	2g	
Which is proportional to the fourth power of the scale mass introduced above  (g, ) .
What is particularly important for us is that in case of a spontaneous breaking of scale invariance (SBSI), leading to a non-vanishing trace for the energy-momentum tensor of the matter field, the determinant of the induced metric that describes the cosmological structure, is nothing but the Nambu-Goldstone boson  implied by SBSI, the equation of motion of which is
(18)
where t is the vacuum expectation value of the trace of the energy-momentum tensor eq.(17).
QCD in an anti de Sitter background: Bose-Einstein condensation of the gluons
After huge developments in research about string theory applied to quantum gravity, the interest to string theory came back to the research of the string theories equivalent to QCD, and that is how emerged the concept of gauge/gravity duality [16] through the so-called ADS/CFT (Anti de Sitter/Conformal Field Theory) correspondence of J.M. Maldacena [17]. This correspondence now appears as the most reliable approach to QCD in the non-perturbative regime [18], and it provides us with a hint about the cosmological implications of QCD at the color confinement scale. In ref. [19], Maldacena has explained some of the qualitative features of QCD in an anti de Sitter background which we adapt for our purpose of explaining how the QCD vacuum repels color: any massless gluon moving towards the boundary hits this boundary and is sent back just like by a mirror in a finite time. The Hubble horizon at the confinement
scale which has a radius of about  L   106 s , corresponding to a temperature (or an
acceleration in units where	 k   c  1 ) of about 109 eV , precisely acts as such a mirror,
blocking color information (by sending back the gluon) but not the full four-momentum carried

by the initial gluon. The missing four-momentum, equal to1/ 2kBT , is carried by a quantum of the dilaton field, which we interpret as the Bose-Einstein gluon condensate: a spherical wave function with a wave length equal to the Hubble radius.
5/ Discussion and conclusion
We thus see that SBSI in QCD may lead, in the cosmological context, to a possible interpretation of dark matter as a scalar gravitation field modeling a Mach’s ether component, or as emerging, through a Bose-Einstein condensation mechanism, out of the quantum vacuum. Before discussing possible theoretical implications of this scheme, let us see whether there exists in the current literature, some works which comfort or invalidate it.
Let us note, in this respect the work of ref. [20], in which it is shown that with a scalar graviton, called a “systolon” one can reproduce the rotation curves of objects in the halos of galaxies or clusters, that are usually attributed to dark matter, which rather comfort the interpretation of dark matter as a scalar Mach’s ether.
Let us also note that Bose Einstein condensation has been considered in Hydrodynamic simulations or phenomenological [21] interpretations of the heavy ion collision experiments which suggest that the quark-gluon plasma, the state of matter from which is supposed to emerge baryonic matter and, if our conjecture is correct, dark matter, behaves as a low viscosity fluid due to the formation of gluon and quark condensates.
Also, it turns out that several attempts have been made to model dark matter as a Bose Einstein condensate of particles belonging to extensions of the standard model, of which the most favored is the axion, the Nambu-Goldstone scalar associated with the Peccei-Quinn solution to the strong CP problem [22]. In ref. [23], it is interesting to note that in order for the proposed dark matter model to work, QCD has to play a role by inducing at the color confinement scale a potential in which the axion condenses and acquires a time (or temperature) dependent mass. In this model, the properties (mass and coupling to 2 ) have to be fine-tuned in order to explain why such a particle has not been discovered yet. However one may ask the question whether it is the hypothetical axion or QCD that is at the origin of dark matter.
On the other hand, in ref. [24], the authors propose an axion-like BEC model for dark matter of which they show, by means of high precision simulations, that it agrees with the conventional cold dark matter model in the description of large scale structures in the distribution of galaxies and works much better than it in the description of small scale structures thanks to interferences between the “dark quantum waves” and some waves arising in hydro-dynamical models (Jeans instability effect). The proposed model depends on just one free

parameter, the axion mass which turns out to be about 8.1 10-23 eV. Let me note that whereas such a small “mass” is very difficult to accept for a genuine elementary particle, it turns out to be of the same order of magnitude as the temperature of the present-day Hubble horizon, and thus more in favor of an interpretation in terms of a dilaton, a quasi-particle with a time (or temperature) dependent mass representing the collective gravitational effect of the Bose-Einstein gluon condensate.
If one agrees with the idea that dark matter emergent from the QCD vacuum contributes, together with dark energy, to the Mach’s ether, one can ask the question whether another component of the Mach’s ether emerges from the electroweak quantum vacuum. I think that this is possible but that it is difficult to distinguish such a component from the standard radiation contribution of which we know that it is very small in the present-day balance of the cosmological density parameters (about 2.10-5). So, if our conjecture is correct, one can say that the main discovery of CDM is that the Mach’s ether (dark matter + dark energy) not only exists, which hitherto had never been clearly established, but also represents 95% of the content of the universe. What a beautiful confirmation of the Einstein’s statement that “according to the general theory of relativity, space without ether is unthinkable”!
Clearly, much more work is needed to make the heuristic and qualitative arguments presented here more quantitative and better theoretically founded. The necessary work that would be needed to put on experimental or observational tests the proposed idea, would have to be largely interdisciplinary, with collaborations of experts in particle physics, astrophysics, hydrodynamics, computer simulations, and ultra-low temperature physics. Also, if the attempts to discover a clear evidence in favor of other ways of addressing the dark matter issue, such as neutralinos, MOND, or warm dark matter with sterile neutrinos, continue to fail, and if our conjecture gets a better ground, then one would have to have a thorough strategic reflection about large scale experimental long term programs.
In conclusion, let me say that due to the impossibility of proposing a clear-cut experimental or observational test allowing to definitely rule it out, this conjecture only makes sense as an element of a cosmogonic narrative. True, a narrative has not the same value as a predictive quantitative theory, but it may have an important philosophical range because it touches on ontology. For instance, one can say that the Brout Englert Higgs (BEH) mechanism is more than a clever ad hoc trick to solve the purely epistemic problem of making possible the electroweak unification, because, in the framework of a cosmogonic narrative, it is associated with a cosmic event in which particles that hitherto were massless, became massive. In the same way, one can say that our way of interpreting color confinement in QCD, not simply as

an epistemic solution to the problems of non-perturbative QCD, but as the emergence occurring at a precise moment of the cosmic evolution of both the baryonic matter and the dark matter, has an important epistemological range because it relates this emergence with the longstanding issue of the ether of general relativity.
Now with respect to alternative approaches, ours has a methodological advantage, namely that it avoids any fine-tuning [25] to add to the initial conditions that, according to the definition of a cosmogonic theory given by Georges Lemaître [26], are necessary in any cosmogonic narrative.
“The object of a cosmogonic theory is to look for ideally simple initial conditions from which can have resulted, through the interplay of known physical forces, the current world in its full complexity.”

Acknowledgements: it is a pleasure to cheerfully acknowledge Michel Spiro, with whom several of the ideas here presented were elaborated in the preparation and the writing of our book Le boson et le chapeau mexicain, [27] devoted to the discovery, in 2012, of the Brout Englert Higgs (BEH) boson. I am also grateful to Sylvain Hudlet for several very fruitful discussion and for bringing to my attention the Einstein’s address at Leiden. Many thanks to Vincent Bontems, Vincent Brindejonc, Alexei Grinbaum, Etienne Klein and Roland Lehoucq for critical reading of the manuscript.





References

A. Einstein, Ether and the theory of relativity, address at the university of Leiden, May 1920, http://www.spaceandmotion.com/Physics-Albert-Einstein-Leiden-1920.htm. In French, Einstein, Œuvres choisies, 5, Vol. 5 Science, éthique, philosophie, pp. 81-88, Le Seuil, CNRS, 1991
K. Nakamura et al.(PDG), JP G 37, 075021 (2010) and 2011 partial update for the 2012 edition (pdg.lbl.gov)
Planck 2015 results. XIII. Cosmological parameters http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01589v2
Planck 2015 results XV, Gravitational lensing ArXiv:1502.01591
G. Lemaître, The cosmological constant in Albert Einstein Philosopher – scientist, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, MJF Books, p. 443, New York 1949
T. Padmanabhan, Dark side of the universe, ArXiv:astro-ph/0510492
T. Padmanabhan, ArXiv: hep-th/0406060
T. Padmanabhan, General Relativity from a Thermodynamic Perspective, Gen. Rel. Grav., 46, 1673 (2014), http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.3253
S. Weinberg, The cosmological constant problem, Reviews of Modern Physics, Vol. 61, No. 1, January 1989
T. Padmanabhan, Dark energy and its implications for gravity, arXiv:0807.2356
T.D. Lee, Particle physics and introduction to field theory, Harwood academic publishers, p. 404, Chur, London, New York, 1981
’t Hooft, G. (1974). A planar diagram theory for strong interactions. Nucl. Phys. B 72, 461.
Stephen L. Adler, Einstein gravity as a symmetry breaking effect in quantum field theory Review of Modern Physics, Vol 54, No 3, 729, 1982

/
[14]F. Gürsey, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 24 (1963), 211
R. Brout, F. Englert and E. Gunzig, The Creation of the Universe as a Quantum Phenomenon, Annals of Physics 115, 78-106 (1978)
G.T. Horowitz and J. Polchinsky, Gauge/gravity duality arXiv:gr-qc/0602037v3 18 Apr 2006
J.M. Maldacena, The large N limit of superconformal field theories and super gravity, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998)
[18]A. Bernamonti and R. Peschanski, Time-dependent AdS/CFT correspondence and the Quark-Gluon plasma arXiv:1102.0725
|19] J.M. Maldacena, Black holes and Holography in String Theory http://www.bourbaphy.fr/maldacena.pdf
[20] Yu. F. Pirogov , Scalar graviton as dark matter arXiv:1401.8191
[21]J.P. Blaizot, J. Liao and L. McLerran, Gluon Transport Equation in the Small Angle Approximation and the Onset of Bose-Einstein Condensation arXiv:1305.2119
R. D. Peccei and H. R. Quinn CP Conservation in the Presence of Instantons Phys. Rev. Lett., 38:1440–1443, 1977.
L. D. Duffy and K. van Bibber Axions as Dark Matter Particles arXiv:0904.3346
Hsi-Yu Schive, Tzihong Chiueh∗ & Tom Broadhurst Cosmic Structure as the Quantum Interference of a Coherent Dark Wave arXiv:1406.6586).
A. Grinbaum, On the eve of the LHC: conceptual questions in high-energy physics http://arxiv.org/abs/0806.4268
G. Lemaître, L’hypothèse de l’atome primitif – Essai de cosmogonie – p. 176, Neuchâtel, Editions de Griffon,
Neuchâtel, 1946
G. Cohen-Tannoudji and M. Spiro, Le boson et le chapeau mexicain – un nouveau grand récit de l’univers – Gallimard, Folio essais, (2013)

Published for SISSA by	Springer
Received: May 17, 2021
Revised: October 15, 2021
Accepted: December 5, 2021
Published: December 21, 2021


Dark QCD matters



Raghuveer Garani, Michele Redi and Andrea Tesi
INFN Sezione di Firenze,
Via G. Sansone 1, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Florence, Italy
E-mail: garani@fi.infn.it, michele.redi@fi.infn.it, andrea.tesi@fi.infn.it
Abstract: We investigate the nightmare scenario of dark sectors that are made of non-abelian gauge theories with fermions, gravitationally coupled to the Standard Model (SM). While testing these scenarios is experimentally challenging, they are strongly motivated by the accidental stability of dark baryons and pions, that explain the cosmological stability of dark matter (DM). We study the production of these sectors which are minimally populated through gravitational freeze-in, leading to a dark sector temperature much lower than the SM, or through inflaton decay, or renormalizable interactions producing warmer DM. Despite having only gravitational couplings with the SM these scenarios turn out to be rather predictive depending roughly on three parameters: the dark sector temperature, the confinement scale and the dark pion mass. In particular, when the initial temperature is comparable to the SM one these scenarios are very constrained by structure formation,
∆Neff and limits on DM self-interactions. Dark sectors with same temperature or warmer than SM are typically excluded.

Keywords: Beyond Standard Model, Cosmology of Theories beyond the SM

ArXiv ePrint: 2105.03429










Open Access, ⃝c The Authors.
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP12(2021)139

Article funded by SCOAP3.

/
Contents
Introduction	1
Dark QCD	3
Cosmological stability	4
Production mechanisms	5
Tree level production	6
Inflationary production	8
Thermal history	10
Dark phase transition	11
Dark sector temperature after the phase transition	12
DM abundance	13
Phenomenology	16
DM self interactions	16
Dark radiation	17
Structure formation	17
Gravitational waves	19
Phenomenological summary	22
Conclusions	23
A Production of CFT from contact operators	24
A.1  Inflaton scattering	26



Introduction
All the current evidences for the existence of dark matter (DM) rely on its gravitational interactions. At late time the most convincing observations are gravitationally collapsed structures ranging from the smallest known galaxies to the largest known galaxy clusters [1] while CMB strikingly confirms this picture at early times [2]. Lacking any non-gravitational evidence for DM, truly dark sectors that perhaps interact only gravitationally are a plausi-ble possibility. To this end, pure gravitational production of dark sectors has gained much attention in recent times, and several models have been studied [3–12].
In the landscape of secluded dark sectors one possible hint to the nature of DM is the idea of accidental DM stability. Stable particles are at the heart of the visible universe. While the electron is exactly stable, the proton is known to have an extremely long lifetime,

τ > 1034 yr. In the standard model (SM) proton stability is beautifully explained by acci-dental baryon number conservation of the SM lagrangian that is only violated by dimension 6 operators which are suppressed by the scale of new physics, perhaps the unification or the Planck scale. The same level of elegance is typically not shared by the dark sector where DM stability is often granted imposing ad hoc global symmetries, most notably R-parity in supersymmetry. Motivated by this observation, models with composite DM have been proposed in the literature [13–23] (see also [24] for a review on the topic).
A large fraction of previous studies focused on dark sectors charged under the SM, leading to DM phenomenology in the same universality class of weakly interacting massive particles. In the most compelling scenario DM is a baryon of the dark sector with electro-weak charges [18], whose mass is expected to be around 100 TeV if thermally produced or lower if asymmetric [25]. In this work we consider dark gauge sectors with fermions neutral under the SM.1 This framework yields DM candidates in the form of dark hadrons which are characterized by a compositeness scale Λ and by the absence of any renormalizable interactions with the SM. Concretely we will study SU(N ) gauge theories with NF light flavors, that we dub dark QCD (dQCD), see [26–28] for related work. The physics is described by the lagrangian,

∫ d4x √−g "L
− 1 Ga Gµνa + ψ¯

 D/ − m  ψ
+ Σ OSMOdark # .	(1.1)


where OSM (Odark) are gauge invariant operators of the SM (dark) sector.
In the most minimal case with no fermions the lightest glueballs are accidental DM candidates [29–34]. In this context, gravitational production leads to viable models with dark sectors much colder than the SM [11, 35].
The addition of fermions gives rise to a host of new possibilities and novel phenomena. Accidentally stable DM candidates are in this case the lightest dark baryons and pions, where the latter can be arbitrarily lighter than Λ in principle. Baryon DM in dQCD was also studied in [26] with somewhat different conclusions. Contrary to the pure glue scenario the leading interaction between the dark sector and the SM is through the Higgs portal,
|H|2ψ¯ψ. This dimension 5 operator even when suppressed by the Planck scale dominates
DM production and controls pions stability. The latter turn out to be cosmologically stable if their mass is below the GeV scale. Gauge theories with fermions are approximately Weyl invariant except for the fermion mass terms and confinement scale. This implies that inflationary production is suppressed if the Hubble scale during inflation is larger than Λ. These sectors are instead populated through tree level gravitational interactions leading to sectors colder than the SM. It is also possible that heavy degrees of freedom provide thermal contact with the SM or that the inflaton has a sizable width in the dark sector producing warmer sectors.
Depending on the dark sector initial temperature different scenarios emerge. We will show how dark baryon (pions) can constitute heavy (light) DM, spanning many orders of magnitude in mass, can be realized in dQCD. Contrary to models with SM charges

1For a discussion of secluded U(1) models we refer the reader to refs. [3, 6].

the pions turn out to be excellent DM candidates beside baryons. This setup naturally endows DM candidates with intrinsic self-interactions at low energies, that leads to the exciting possibility of observable effects in structure formation. Thus we illustrate how completely secluded dark sectors could be phenomenologically tested through cosmological probes. In particular dark sectors that are initially in thermal equilibrium with the SM are generically excluded.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we review the basic features of confining SU(N ) gauge theories, and describe few properties of the lightest dark-baryons and -pions. In section 3 we describe in detail how dark sector particles could be produced in the early universe. We outline three such possibilities namely, gravitational production of CFTs, production through Planck suppressed operators, and inflationary production. In section 4 we follow the thermal history of the dark sector. We first consider a phase transition in the dark sector that results in confinement, and then proceed to the computation of the relic abundance for dark-baryons and -pions. In section 5 we study the phenomenology of our setup and present the main results. Broadly, we find three viable regions of parameter space where confined dQCD would provide DM candidates. Finally, we draw our conclusions in section 6. In the appendix we present general formulae for the production of a dark sector through the Higgs portal.

Dark QCD
We are interested in asymptotically free non-abelian gauge theories with fermions lighter than the dynamical scale Λ. This can be realized with classic SU(N ), SO(N ) and Sp(N ) gauge theories with vector-like fermions. For simplicity we focus on SU(N ) gauge theories with NF light flavors described by the lagrangian (1.1). At energies much larger than the confinement scale Λ this system is weakly coupled and approximately Weyl invariant. Assuming standard QCD dynamics this sector confines producing hadrons. The dynamics is such that the global chiral symmetry SU(NF )× SU(NF ) spontaneously breaks to the diagonal subgroup SU(NF ) producing Nambu-Goldstone bosons, the pions. In this paper we assume that all the fundamental fermions ψi are singlet under SM so they will have in general non-degenerate masses, miψ¯iψi, preserving individual species number ψi → eiαi ψi. In practice we will consider degenerate quark masses for simplicity. Among the hadrons we will focus on the pions that are the lightest states and baryons that are the natural DM candidates being accidentally stable.
Pions. The spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry produces N 2 − 1 light Nambu-Goldstone bosons in the adjoint of SU(NF ). Their interactions are described as in QCD by the corresponding chiral effective lagrangian of the form
L	f 2	2
π	4 Tr(∂µU ) +bTr[MU +h.c.]+WZW,	U = exp[iπ/f ] and	Mij = miδij .
(2.1)
where WZW is the Wess-Zumino-Witten topological term [36] and π ≡ πaTa, where Ta
are SU(NF ) generators. Expanding the lagrangian above to fifth order in the pion field,

for degenerate quark masses one finds


L  =	Tr [∂
2	2
π∂µπ]	π	π	4	µ	µ

π	4	µ
Tr [ππ] +
4	48
f 2 Tr π
− 24 f 2 Tr [ππ∂µπ∂
π − π∂µππ∂
π] .

+	N	ǫµνρσTr [π∂ π∂ π∂ π∂ π] + . . .


/
240π2f 5
µ	ν	ρ	σ

The interactions in the first line induce pion elastic scattering while the second line from the expansion of the WZW term is responsible for pion number changing processes [37].
Baryons. The baryon spectrum is obtained by simply generalizing the eight-fold way of the strong interactions. The lightest multiplets are [18]:
for NF = 1, baryons are spin N/2 antisymmetric combinations of N quarks.
For NF even, baryons are spin 0 particles in the symmetric representation of the flavor group.
For NF odd, baryons are spin 1/2 particles in the octet-like representation of flavor.
With our normalization, using QCD values, the lightest baryons are expected to have masses MB ∼ 10f .
Cosmological stability
The dark sector is invariant under a global U(1) dark-baryon number. As a consequence the lightest dark baryon is accidentally stable. The lightest pion is also stable as it is lightest state of the dark sector. Allowing for higher-dimensional operators can in principle make dark baryon (pion) unstable over cosmological time scales.
In the absence of light right-handed neutrinos, we have two possibilities to break the above mentioned dark-baryon number. They involve SM operators |H|2 and LH as the dark sector is a singlet under the SM. For the lightest baryon B, there are two effective interactions that lead to decay, B|H|2 (BLH) for even (odd) number of dark colors N .2 The most constraining situation arises when N = 3 as BLH originates from a dimension 7 operator Ψ3LH/M 3 . This results in baryon lifetimes that are compatible cosmological

stability of DM,

τB ∼
8πM 6	27
M 7	∼ 10	s
4 × 108GeV 7
MB
.	(2.2)

Dark pions can decay through dimension 5 and 6 operators of the form,3
 1  Ψ¯ iγ5Ψj|H|2 +  1  Ψ¯ iγµγ5Ψjf¯σµf .	(2.3)
Λ5	2
2For the special case N = 1 baryons are higher spin, therefore the effective operators must contain extra derivatives leading to slower decays. For N odd in the presence of right-handed neutrinos we can also write BνR, this however leads to suppressed decay within the standard see-saw mechanism.
3Note that operators coupling to SM bilinear f f are not allowed for dark sectors made of SM singlets.
If right-handed neutrinos exist the decay of pions are chirally suppressed by the mass ratio of light and heavy neutrinos, within the see-saw mechanism.

These operators allow the lightest pion to decay to the SM, since they break individual species number. We focus on the Higgs portal operator that owing to its dimensionality pro-duces the largest effects. Using ⟨0|Ψ¯ γ5Ψ|π⟩ = c 4πf 2 this generates the effective operator,


4πf 2
c
Λ5
|H |π .	(2.4)

For Mπ > MH/2 the dark pions can decay into on-shell Higgs. For Mπ < MH/2 the leading effect is due to the mixing with the Higgs boson, see [22]. The most relevant decay are tree-level decay to SM fermions and 1-loop decay to photons when the pion is lighter than electrons. One finds,

Mπ	α2	M 3
Γ	¯ = Nc	y2 sin2 α ,	Γπ→γγ = 	π cγ sin2 α ,	(2.5)

π→ff
16π f
256π3 v2

where sin α ≈ c4πf 2v/(Λ5M 2 ) and the coefficient cγ can be found for example in [38]. For
Mπ < Me, neglecting confinement effects one finds cγ = 121/9. This leads to the lifetimes,
MπΛ2	 10 TeV 4  Λ5  2  Mπ
τπ Mπ >2MH ≈ 2πc2f 4 ≈ 1s	√cf	MPl	10 TeV ,	(2.6)

20 Λ2M 4  1

/
  TeV  4  Λ

/	/
 2  M

/

!2  10 GeV 

/
//


4 Λ2M 4

/	/
  TeV  4  Λ5

 2  MeV 3

/
/

These lifetimes determine the allowed region of parameters of dQCD. If pions are DM conservatively their lifetime should be larger than 1026 s, see [39, 40] for a more detailed discussion. In practice since pion DM requires masses below GeV a weaker bound will apply. If DM is made of baryons the pions can be a subdominant component of DM if they are cosmologically stable or they should decay before BBN, τπ < 1 s. Since in this case pions are only a fraction of DM a more detailed study is in principle required but we expect roughly similar constraints from decays. Concerning baryons instead their lifetime does not lead to interesting constraints, at least in the regime where the DM abundance is reproduced.
The allowed region of parameter space is drawn in figure 1.

Production mechanisms
The dQCD sector we consider in this work is secluded from the SM. Since the SM and the dark sector communicate only through gravity and Planck suppressed higher dimensional operators, they are never in thermal equilibrium. It is therefore necessary to explain how the dark sector is populated in the early Universe. The possible mechanisms of production in our setup are sensitive to UV parameters, such as the Hubble scale during inflation, HI, the reheating temperature TR, or the inflaton couplings. Generally, dark sectors could be produced in the following ways:


1011

1010

109

108

107

106

105

104

103

102

101

100

10-1

10-2

10-3
10-7  10-6  10-5  10-4  10-3  10-2  10-1  100  101  102  103  104  105  106  107	108
Mπ[GeV]
Figure 1. 2-D contours of the life time of dark baryons (pink) and pions (blue) as a function of the pion decay constant f and the pion mass Mπ, with Λ5 = MPl and MB = 10 f . Blue region is excluded if the abundance of pions is comparable to the DM abundance. Massive pions decay through a dimension 5 operator, see text for details..


Production from the SM plasma: through exchange of graviton at tree level [3, 6, 8] and at loop level [5], as well as through dimension 5 operators suppressed by the Planck scale via the Higgs portal, as we discuss in this paper.

Inflationary production: through quantum fluctuations in an expanding back-ground [41]. This mechanism requires explicit breaking of Weyl invariance. In our model at high energies, this breaking is proportional to the fermion masses leading to very small effects as we will show below.
Inflaton decays: the dark sector could be produced with an energy density 𝖺 ρD/ρSM = ΓD/ΓSM, i.e. the production is proportional to the inflaton branching ratio to the dark sector.

Renormalizable interactions: if heavy fermions charged under the SM exist then the system will be in thermal equilibrium with the SM at temperatures above the mass.

In the rest of this section we discuss the first two production mechanisms and provide for them rather general results.

Tree level production
Any dark sector can be produced from the SM thermal bath as long as it has some fee-ble interactions [42]. The only unavoidable production mechanism is through tree-level graviton exchange. In our scenario however higher-dimensional operators (suppressed by the Planck scale) can also give sizable production rates. We qualitatively discuss these possibilities below.

Gravitational production.	The yield of gravitationally produced relativistic particles is given by [11]

YD = 6 × 10−6 cD
 TR  3
MPl
.	(3.1)

Where cD is the central charge of the dark sector and TR the reheating temperature.4 The presence of the central charge is due to the fact that at TR both the SM and dark sector are well approximated by relativistic CFTs, and given the tensor structure of the gravitational coupling, the production rate can be computed simply in terms of the two-point functions of the stress-energy tensor [44]. Gravitational production gives rise to a dark sector that is under-populated compared to thermal equilibrium. The typical energy of the dark quanta produced are however of order of the temperature of the visible sector so that the energy density is of order ρD ≈ cDT 4T 3 /M 3 . More precisely, solving the relevant Boltzmann
equation, and neglecting small corrections from quantum statistics, one finds the following phase space distribution [11]


fD(T, p) ≈
2π4g
135 YD
p e−p/T
,	(3.2)
T

which is only marginally different from a thermal Boltzmann distribution.

Planck suppressed operators. The abundance of particles that are produced from scatterings mediated by Planck suppressed effective operators can be comparable or even more important than graviton exchange depending on the dimensionality of the operator. However, contrary to gravitational production these contributions are model dependent, determined by the UV completion of the model. As a conservative assumption we will thus allow for higher dimensional operators suppressed by the Planck scale. The most phenomenologically relevant case arises when we consider the lowest dimensional operator in the SM, i.e. OSM = |H|2 (Higgs portal). Here we show the production rate for this case by considering a general d-dimensional operator in the dark sector O as follows
1	2
Λd−2 |H| O ,	[O] = d ,	(3.3)
where the effective scale ΛUV ∼ MPl. As reviewed in appendix A, in the relativistic limit, scale invariance implies that the 2-point function of O is given by
(x)  (0) =  aO	1  .	(3.4)
8π4 (x2)d
The annihilation cross section is then given by

1 a T 2d−6
⟨σv⟩ = g2 4π Λ2d−4 .	(3.5)
i	UV

4For a real scalar, Weyl fermion and massless gauge field the values of the central charges are respectively
c0 = 4/3, c1/2 = 4 and c1 = 16, see [43].

The abundance of dark sector particles is obtained by solving the Boltzmann equation (see appendix A), we get


∫ TR dT ⟨σv⟩s 2
135√5/2

  TR

 2d−4 MPl

YD =
0
T	H	Yeq = aO

/
4(2d − 5)g3/2π8

/
ΛUV
.	(3.6)
TR


Assuming ΛUV = MPl in the above, the dark sector operator of dimension three will result in the largest yield. This observation is relevant since such operators exist in the dQCD case considered in this work, the fermion bilinears O = Ψ¯ iΨj and O = Ψ¯ iγ5Ψj. Such d = 3 operators are also responsible in making the dark-pion unstable.

Inflaton scattering. The dark sector could also be produced through tree-level inflaton scatterings during reheating [8, 45]. This contribution is negligible in our case in light of the classical Weyl invariance of the action. As shown in appendix A.1 for a traceless CFT the production rate is identically zero. This implies that for elementary fermions and conformally coupled scalars the production is suppressed by the mass of the particle as found in explicit computations. When the mass gap is created dynamically the suppression is even stronger because the dynamical scale should not be treated as a mass until the temperature drops below Λ.

Inflationary production

A different production mechanism relies on quantum fluctuations, usually called inflation-ary fluctuations, that can be relevant during (and after) inflation. We assume here Λ < HI so that the dark sector is deconfined during inflation. The basic principle here is the time-dependence of the metric background, which induces a change in the vacuum state interpreted as particle production (see for example [46] for a recent discussion and refer-ences). Such an effect is very reduced if the theory enjoys an approximate Weyl symmetry, through which the time-dependence of the metric can be (classically) removed. This is the case of deconfined gauge fields and fermions, that are Weyl invariant in the massless limit. This implies that particle production must be proportional to the breaking of Weyl invariance, due to confinement at H ∼ Λ,during reheating or radiation domination. For this reason, in our case we expect that the details of reheating will be important, but the overall contribution to energy density is small as we now discuss. This discussion differs from the one in [35].
Within the inflationary context, several works have studied the gravitational produc-tion of elementary particles.5 It is interesting to summarize the results for an elemen-tary fermion of mass M [10, 48, 49]. If the mass is small compared to Hubble at the end of inflation He, two contributions are possible depending on the value of Hubble at

5We focus the simplest possibility where the fermions do not couple to the inflaton. Such couplings may lead to new effects and different phenomenological predictions, see [47].

reheating HR [10],

 5 × 10−25


		2
× 1011 GeV	HR


≫ M ,

YD ≈
 5 × 10−22
	TR

He ≫ M ≫ HR .
(3.7)

While the precise abundance depends on the details of reheating, the crucial and robust result for the present discussion is that the production is dominated by co-moving momenta of order
kc
a ≈ M ≈ H(a) .	(3.8)
Since we assume M < He this will happen during reheating or in radiation domina-tion [10, 48]:

k 	 H   2	k 	 H   2  M  1

In other words, these modes are not produced by inflationary fluctuations but during reheating or radiation domination when the modes re-enter the horizon and they are non-relativistic at production.
The discussion above makes it clear that for confining gauge theories the earlier esti-mates cannot be applied. Since by assumption M < Λ one needs to take necessarily into account confinement. Similarly to finite temperature as long as H/(2π) > Λ the physical degrees of freedom are gluons and quarks as the Hubble patch is smaller than the size of hadrons. When H/2π < Λ the physical degrees of freedom are the hadrons so that one should turn to a computation in terms of composites. Roughly in the equation above M should then be replaced by the mass of composite states g∗Λ if this is not too large. A more detailed computation could be done for the Goldstone bosons. However, we expect these effects to be rather small and subdominant compared to the contribution from vacuum misalignment which originates in a completely similar fashion to the case of axion-like par-ticles. After confinement, the pion field will emerge with a random initial value, π(x) ∼ Λ, in a given Hubble patch, which should be averaged upon. When Hubble drops below the mass of the pions Hπ ≈ Mπ, they will begin to oscillate behaving as non-relativistic energy density. It is important to distinguish if oscillations occur during radiation domination or during reheating. In the latter case the entropy in the SM plasma increases, so we need to check whether HR ≈ Mπ. The yield in the two branches are as follows
 M 2Λ2	0.4 √MπΛ2	Λ2


MπY ≈
 s(Tπ
) ≈  1/4
∗
3/2
Pl
<	2 TR ,	Mπ < HR
Pl

.	(3.10)

M 2Λ2 H2	Λ2



Note that in the second estimate above we have taken entropy dilution into account. We see that the first case gives a smaller final abundance, numerically we obtain


Ωh2 ∼

/
Mπ

/
GeV
Λ	2
1010 GeV
,	Mπ < HR .	(3.11)

This contribution will be negligible phenomenologically.

In the case of pure glue theories [11] no light degrees of freedom analogous to pions exist. In that case we expect the abundance from inflationary fluctuations to be given by the formulae above with Mπ → MDG ∼ 5Λ. Note that this estimate agrees parametrically with the energy released during the phase transition ∼ Λ4.

Thermal history
The cosmological history of the dark sector begins with their production. As discussed in the preceding section, gravitational and inflationary mechanisms considered here lead to a non-thermal distribution of free quarks and gluons initially. Because of interactions in the dark sector as the universe expands the system is driven towards equilibrium. The issue of thermalization of gauge theories is general a complicated problem see for example [50, 51]. Here we will follow [11] where a discussion of thermalization in a cosmological setting is presented in the context of pure glue gauge theories. Thermalization of the dark quark-gluon plasma is achieved through number changing processes such us 3 → 2 interactions. For gravitational production the typical energy of the quanta is of order T so that on
dimensional grounds σ2→3 ≈ α3 /T 2 where αeff is the effective coupling that controls
number changing processes. αeff can in principle be derived in terms of the perturbative gauge coupling and is thus related to the confinement scale. The number density in the dark sectors is roughly nD ∼ YDg∗T 3 so that the rate for number changing process Γ ∼
YDg∗α3 T . Given that the Hubble rate during radiation domination scales as H ∼ T 2/MPl
thermalization unavoidably occurs as long as the temperature is larger than the confinement scale. We can estimate the visible sector temperature where thermalization takes place as,
T∗ ∼ YDMPl√g∗α3  ,	(4.1)
where αeff is the effective coupling that controls number changing processes, σ2→3 ≈

3
eff
/T 2.  A posteriori we can check that the dark sector thermalizes in the deconfined

regime when the DM abundance is reproduced. For this reason the only memory of the production mechanism is the ratio of temperature between visible and dark sector that we will take as input in the phenomenological analysis.
As the produced dark sector particles are relativistic, we use conservation of energy and find that the dark sector temperature is given by

 	
ξ0	TD =
T
g∗ρD gDρSM
1
4
,	(4.2)

where T (TD) is the visible (dark) sector temperature. With g∗ (gD) being the relativistic degrees of freedom in the visible (dark) sector. This reasoning is valid for the production from the thermal plasma (through graviton exchange or higher dimensional operators) and from inflaton decay. Whereas, for the case of inflationary production this argument does not apply, as dark sector particles are produced while non-relativistic as discussed in the previous section.
As mentioned before, dQCD is conformal at high energies, thus quantities such as the central charge (cD), degrees of freedom (gD), and the coefficients of 2-point functions are

completely determined by N and the number of light flavors (NF ), as follows

cQCD = 16 N 2 − 1 + 8NF ,		gD = 2 N 2 − 1 + 4NF N , aΨ¯ Ψ = 8NNF ,	aF 2/4 = N 2 − 1 24 .
Depending on the production mechanism considered the initial dark sector tempera-ture TD has different parametric dependence on the reheating temperature TR, and other variables in the theory. For example, if the two sectors interact in a renormalizable way ther-
mal equilibrium is always reached at earlier times (or large temperatures) then, ξ0	= 1.
Whereas, production via tree-level graviton exchange results in [11]
   T  3

If effective operators with d = 5 dominate the production, then the initial temperature ratio depends more weakly on the reheating temperature,


1
/
0	aΨ¯ Ψ MPlTR	4

1
TR	4

ξ|H|2 ≈ 0.2	g	2
∼ 0.1
ΛUV
.	(4.4)

Finally, if produced through inflaton decay ξ0 is proportional to the inflaton branching in the dark sector,
  g Γ	 1

ξ0	=	∗  D
.	(4.5)

dec
gDΓSM

Let us note that the inflaton decay can generate a dark sector temperature larger than the SM one. As we will discuss below this possibility is rather strongly constrained. With the initial dark sector temperature determined we now proceed to the discussion of confinement and phase transition in the dark sector.
Dark phase transition
Before we evaluate the abundance of DM candidates, we must first consider the nature of phase transition in our dQCD model. We assume that the sector has thermalized in the relativistic regime (unconfined phase). Similarly to ordinary QCD, as the dark sector temperature TD drops below some critical temperature the dark sector confines, resulting in color singlet states such as dark-baryons and dark-pions.
Depending on N and NF the phase transition could be first-order, or a cross over. A few comments are necessary at this point. Most studies often focus on the dynamics of pure-gluonic theory as they are relevant from a fundamental perspective, i.e. they capture the essential qualitative features of the phase transition, and they are numerically more convenient [52]. In this case it is found that the phase transition is first order [53] (and references within) from lattice calculations. Essentially, transition occurs without super-cooling and in equilibrium, resulting in a small increase of entropy [54].
Inclusion of light fermionic degrees of freedom can change the above picture qualita-tively [55, 56]. In this case phase transition can be first order or cross-over depending on

NF . It is found that the transition is weakly first order for 3 ≤ NF . 4N for N > 3 [54], which is expected to be adiabatic with the critical temperature Tc ≃ O(1) f [57].
As the phase transition completes the system reorganizes in color neutral states. We call TΩ the SM temperature when this happens. In this confined phase baryons and pions are the physical degrees of freedom. As pions are quite light (Mπ . 5 f ), they are relativistic
at production in the dark plasma. Consequently their interactions grow with energy, such
that they are sufficiently fast and equilibrate. Baryons on the other hand are heavy with MB ∼ 10 f . Nevertheless they also thermalize with dark thermal bath, but their abundance is suppressed at the phase transition as the temperature is smaller than MB.
If the phase transition is a cross-over or sufficiently adiabatic we can use entropy conservation to determine the temperature after the phase transition.6 One finds that the ratio of temperatures ξ ≡ TD/T |TΛ right after the phase transition is given by,
ξ	2 N 2 − 1 + 4NNF	31

ξ0 ≈
N 2 − 1
.	(4.6)

Let us discuss the case when the interactions are not sufficiently strong to thermalize in the relativistic regime, i.e. T∗ < Λ in eq. (4.1). If the pions are relativistic right after the phase transition they will thermalize. The leading number changing process is due to the Wess-Zumino-Witten term N/(4π)2∂4π5/f 5 that induces 2 → 3 processes. This leads to number changing processes with cross-sections σ2→3 ∼ N 2T 8/f 10 which are unsuppressed at the phase transition leading to rates faster than Hubble. In this case we can estimate the temperature using conservation of energy as in eq. (4.2).
Dark sector temperature after the phase transition
On the completion of the phase transition the dark baryons and pions thermalizes with a ratio of temperature ξ = TD/T if rates are sufficiently fast. In this phase we take TD to be the temperature of the dark pion gas, which will be relativistic for (much) longer than baryons. In principle the dark sector can have a temperature evolution different for each (relativistic/non-relativistic) species. However, as baryons and pions interact with each other we expect their temperature to be the same, thanks to kinetic equilibrium. In principle, however, they might be different and can be defined as [59, 60]


Ti ≡
Pi(Ti)
  gi	 ∫	d3pi
2
i fi(Ti) .	(4.7)

ni(Ti)
ni(Ti)
(2π)3 3Ei

where Pi is the pressure of the i-th species. By integrating the Boltzmann equation for the
i-th species, with a weight p2/(3Ei), we get


ni  T˙ + δ HT
= − n˙ i + 3Hni
+ gi Ti
dπiC[fi ·
2
i
/
3Ei
] .	(4.8)


/
6In [58] the temperature after the phase transition was determined through energy conservation assuming that the phase transition of pure glue theories is explosive, increasing the entropy. We believe a transition in quasi-equilibrium is more plausible for QCD-like theory. Nevertheless the two conditions lead to a similar temperature after the phase transition.

With

δi ≡ 1 +
gi ∫	d3pi

/

2 m2
i	i fi(Ti) =
( 1 Ti ≫ mi

(4.9)

Tini
(2π)3 3Ei E2
2 Ti ≪ mi .

We consider the case where kinetic equilibrium is maintained in the dark sector, this enforces all temperatures to follow the one of dark pions, Ti = TD. It is then useful to define the total number of dark sector particle, n ≡ i ni, to recast the set of Boltzmann equations into a single one
n  D + nHTD + Σ ni(δi − 1)HTD ≈ −(n˙ + 3Hn) .	(4.10)
Given that pions are more abundant that baryons we can simply follow the evolution of the number density of pions. Moreover the total number of dark sector particles is approximately conserved during the freeze-out of baryons (we neglect possible cannibalistic effects when pions are non-relativistic), so that the evolution of the dark sector temperature TD only depends on pions being relativistic or non-relativistic. Therefore in terms of the visible temperature we expect the following behavior
  gs(T )  1
/	/	/	/	/


   gs(T )   3
T 2
ξ	, T	< M
equivalent to T < M /ξ

	gs(TΩ)	Mπ	D	π	π
where we have included the effect of the decoupling of SM species.

DM abundance
In what follows we assume that the system has thermalized and ξ is the ratio of tempera-tures of the dark sector and SM after the phase transition.
Pion abundance. The numerical abundance of dark pions is mainly set by the phase transition. If the phase transition takes place in approximate thermal equilibrium we can estimate the abundance of pions at the onset of the confined phase as

2	 ζ (3) 3
/
2	 π2  4
/


The yield of pions (defined with respect to the SM entropy), at the end of the phase transition, is then given by
Y =  N 2 − 1  45ζ(3) ξ3 .	(4.13)
We notice that, since the dark sector only consists of baryons and pions, and that the baryons are heavier than TD∗, the baryon abundance is already suppressed at the onset. The above yield (and energy density) of pions is mostly unaffected by the subsequent evo-lution. The reason for this is that pions will be relativistic during the freeze-out of baryons. There might be an exception if pions are subject to number changing processes while non-relativistic during and/after baryon freeze-out, however this ‘cannibalistic’ phase would

only deplete the above yield by a logarithmic correction [14]. If the pions are cosmologi-cally stable eq. (4.13) can be used to compute the DM abundance and the corresponding DM mass

Ωh2

/
2		Mπ
   ξ	 3  106.75	DM	0.14 keV	g∗
/	/	/	/

∗	F	(4.14)
The value of DM mass is compatible with cosmological stability if it does not exceed O(100 GeV). Lighter DM masses are achieved in theories with large number of flavors, as M DM ∼ 1/NF . Which takes into account the dependence on NF in ξ and ξ0.
In realizations where ξ0 ≪ 10−3 the prediction for DM mass is incompatible with stability as estimated in eq. (2.6). In this case the pions decay to the SM injecting entropy into the SM plasma diluting the abundance of baryons. We estimate this by computing the release of energy at a temperature TΓ ≈ 1.9(MPlΓπ)2/3/(g∗MπYπ)1/3 when H ∼ Γπ (assuming matter domination, valid for TΓ < (4/3)MπYπ), we derive the new entropy density of the SM and the corresponding dilution factor η as
s	"	(T /M )3/4 #		1.3  M 2 Γ2 !1/4 1 

η = s	≈ min
1, 0.8
Γ	π
3/4
π
≈ min 1,

/
1/4
∗
Pl  π
4
π
Y  .	(4.15)

Asymptotic yields of stable particles have to be multiplied by η. Numerically we imple-ment the full calculation, and under the assumption of matter domination at the time of
decay [61]. In order for the scenario to be viable we require that the reheating temperature after the entropy release from the decay of the pions to be TR,π ≈ √MPlΓπ & 10 MeV.
Baryon abundance.	The relic abundance of baryon is set by annihilation into multi-pion final states and the corresponding Boltzmann equation reads,

dnB

/
Σ	2		nπ

 n	eq	2 

/ /

Where we have allowed for annihilation to n pions that are expected to dominate compared to two-pion processes [62]. The equilibrium number density are computed in terms of the dark sector temperature given by eq. (4.11). In the relativistic regime whether the pions are in equilibrium or not they will have thermal distribution at temperature TD = ξT due to the initial conditions. This allows us to rewrite the equation above in terms of the total annihilation cross-section. With the standard manipulation the equation above can be cast in the following form
dYB = ⟨σv⟩s (T ) hY 2 − (Y eq (T ))2i ,	(4.17)
with TD being the dark sector temperature. Due to the linear relation between T and TD this is just the standard freeze-out equation with an effective cross-section ⟨σv⟩/ξ0. It follows that the freeze-out takes place as usual when Td  MB/25 and the abundance is just re-scaled by ξ.7 When the baryons are in thermal contact with the SM the abundance

7The freeze-out condition on T  is still determined by the condition ⟨σv⟩neq(T ) ≈ H(T ), which gives
D	D
√/

is obtained for masses around 100 TeV corresponding to annihilation cross-section σv ∼
25/M 2 . In this case the abundance is given by,


ΩBh2

/
≈ ξ  g∗
+ gD
ξ4  1/2  MB	 2

→	M	≈
1
/
4
√/	. (4.18)

0.12
106.75
100 TeV
B	ξ	g∗ + gDξ4

Note that this mechanism allows us to easily avoid the unitarity bound of standard freeze-out. In the case of pion DM the baryon abundance is a negligible contribution to the energy density. The above formula does not take into account the possible dilution coming from the late decays of unstable pions (see eq. (2.6)). In this case the final abundance has to be modified by a factor equal to eq. (4.15). If pions inject sufficiently large entropy, the DM baryon mass estimate gets modified to

  1	
/
4 ! 1 
 3/8

MB	≈	√ξ	g + g ξ4	max 1, 10NF ξ	106.75	104 GeV	 , (4.19)
∗	D
where we used eq. (2.6) for pion decay through the Higgs portal. For the model under consideration, we notice that when dilution is important the dependence on ξ drops out when ξ → ∞. The abundance scales as

ΩBh2

/
g1/4 √MPlΓπ
∼
  MB	 2

.	(4.20)

0.12
1/2	Mπ D
100 TeV

This corresponds to the limiting case where initially the SM sector is not populated and it entirely originates from the reheating of the plasma upon pion decay.
The above estimates need to be revised if the baryon freeze-out happens when the pions are also non-relativistic. In order for this regime to be relevant the pions have to be Mπ & TD|f.o, and we have two possible cases to consider depending on whether pion
number changing processes are fast or not.
Non-relativistic pions decoupled. Assuming that pion number changing processes are irrelevant nπ 𝖺 1/a3. Since v2 𝖺 1/a2 the effective temperature drops as TD ∼ 1/a2. This implies that the second term in the Boltzmann equation is enhanced by enMπ /TD . Note that in this case the Boltzmann equation cannot be cast in terms of total annihilation cross-section and processes with the largest number of pions are favored. By taking inspiration from nuclear physics data [62] we argue that the dominant channel is the one dominated by the largest number of pions allowed kinematically, Qn,max = 2MB − nMπ → 0. The Boltzmann equation then reduces simply to
2	 	nπ	 n	eq	2 
The loss of equilibrium is then set by the condition ⟨σv⟩n,max (nπ/neq)n/2 neq ≈ H, which,
√		π	B
taking into account that T =	TDMπ/ξ, gives a freeze-out temperature Qn,max/TD|f.o. ≈
2 log(⟨σv⟩n,maxMπMPlξ2). By solving the differential equation we get


Ω(n,max)
MB	⟨σv⟩

Ω	≈ 0.1 √m
Qn,max
⟨σv⟩n,max
.	(4.22)

This shows that we do not expect a large deviation from the previous case, since the largest deviation appears for Mπ & MB/20 and Qn,max ≈ Mπ, which does not lead to a large effect.
Non-relativistic pions in equilibrium. If the pion number changing processes are fast, then dark pions undergo ‘cannibalism’ that will make nπ track neq with a new scaling of the temperature TD(T ) fixed by conservation of entropy. Since we are studying the freeze-out of baryons, we do not consider pion-number changing processes involving baryons, that will eventually decouple, but we focus on pion self-interactions induced by the WZW in the chiral lagrangian, that allows for πππ → ππ. If self-interactions decouple later than baryon annihilations, this corresponds to a ‘cannibal phase’ [63, 64]. We acknowledge the possible presence of this effect, but neglect the logarithmic corrections to baryon and pion abundance induced by cannibalism. Phenomenologically in the regions where Mπ ≈ MB, pions are non-relativistic during baryon freeze-out, this will not play a major role in the following discussion.

Phenomenology
The phenomenology of our scenarios is essentially determined by 3 parameters,
f ,	Mπ ,	ξ .	(5.1)
The dark pion decay constant f is also roughly the temperature of the deconfinement phase transition while the mass of the baryon is MB ∼ 10f . The relic abundance formulae for both baryons and pions (when they are stable) impose a relation between these quantities so that ξ can be eliminated in terms of the other parameters. It is then useful to discuss these models in the plane (Mπ, f ). We will discuss the phenomenology of our model in terms of these two parameters, determining ξ from the DM abundance constraint.
The results of the phenomenological study are summarized in figure 2.
In the rest of this section we discuss in detail the phenomenological implications of our model, and at the end we characterize the possible phases of our scenario.
DM self interactions
The elastic self scattering cross-section of dark baryons is expected to be at least geometrical and possibly enhanced by light di-baryon intermediate states. Re-scaling the QCD value one finds
σB ≈  4π .	(5.2)
el	2
B
The abundance of baryons reproduces the correct DM abundance only for extremely heavy baryons, MB & 100 TeV (see eq. (4.18)), and this does not lead to any experimentally interesting constraints. Of more interest are pions self-interactions, that could show up both
in the Bullet Cluster and Ly-α constraints as we will discuss in the following. The leading interaction can be computed from the expansion of the chiral lagrangian (2), see [37]. The elastic cross-section at low energy is just,
1  3N 4 − 2N 2 + 6 M 2	NF →3	77	M 2

σel ≃ 64 π	N 2  N 2 − 1	f 4
=
1536 π
f 4 .	(5.3)


108

107

106

105

104

103

102

101

100


10-1


10-2


10-3
10-10 10-9  10-8  10-7  10-6  10-5  10-4  10-3  10-2  10-1  100  101  102  103  104  105  106  107	108
Mπ [GeV]
Figure 2. Parameter space of (secluded) dark QCD as a function of Mπ and f , with baryon mass fixed to MB = 10f , NF = 3 and Λ5 = MPl = 2.4 × 1018 GeV. On the black solid isolines DM abundance is reproduced by dark baryons, while on the black dashed isolines by dark pions. Regions of stability are as in figure 1.

We show regions (shaded in gray in figure 2) that are excluded by the limit on DM self-scattering cross section (σπ /Mπ < cm2/g) from the Bullet cluster [65].
Dark radiation
If the quark masses are vanishing, Mπ ∼ 0, DM is made of baryons while pions contribute as dark radiation. Assuming TΩ > 100 GeV, the contribution to the relativistic number of degrees of freedom at the CMB epoch is
4  gν  4/3   2	4	2	4
/	/
/
where gν = 43/4 is the number of degrees of freedom at neutrino decoupling. For NF = 3
and ξ0 = 1 this leads to a contribution close to the experimental bound, which we take
∆Neff . 0.25 at 95% confidence level [66]. This translate into a bound on the ratio of temperature ξ . 1. This bound is expected to significantly improve in the coming years to reach a 1σ exclusion bound of ∆Neff < 0.027 during the CMB stage IV [67]. These regions are depicted in dark green in figure 2.

Structure formation
Two of the key parameters that control structure formation are the free streaming and collisional damping scales [68]. We discuss this for the case of pion DM, since baryons are usually sufficiently heavier than the mass scales probed by structure formation. Here

we summarize the relevant equation for free-streaming and collisional damping scales. As-suming that DM becomes non-relativistic at a time a(tNR) = aNR before matter-radiation equality, aeq = a(teq), we have the following expressions
∫ teq  dt 

2	∫ tdec	dt	⟨v(t)⟩
/	/
In order to perform these integrals it is often convenient to change variables dt = da/(aH(a)), taking into account that deep in radiation domination H(a) ≈ H0(aeq/a)2(1/aeq)3/2. We can derive analytical expression depending on whether decoupling occurs while DM is relativistic or non-relativistic. We identify the decoupling time through the relation n(t)⟨σelv⟩ ≈ H(tdec) as in [69],8 and we parameterize the DM velocity as ⟨v(t)⟩ = θ(aNR − a) + (aNR/a)θ(a − aNR), which takes into account the non-relativistic behavior with a step function, see also [70]. The scale factor when DM becomes non-relativistic is given by
3T   gs(T )  1
NR	Mπ	gs(TΩ)
The above integrals are dominated by the time when DM becomes non-relativistic, and they scale with the above parameter, aNR. Indeed we can compute the above formulae in two different regimes for the DM velocity and find that the maximum scale is always proportional to aNR, with or without interactions. Depending on whether the decoupling occurs when DM is relativistic or not, one finds
λ	=  aNR  1 − adec + log   aeq   θ (a	− a	) +  aNR   log   aeq   θ (a	− a	) ,

FS	H0√aeq
aNR
aNR
NR	dec
H0√aeq
adec
dec
NR

(5.8)


/
		2  1
/	/

/	/	/	/	/
We see that the largest scale is always of the order of λmax ≈ aNR/(H0√aeq), while adec, and hence the self-interactions, only gives a subleading correction. This is similar to the case analyzed in [70], where self-interactions give negligible effects unless they are large enough to be in tension with the Bullet Cluster constraint (see our footnote 8).
Therefore with this observation, and for the level of our discussion, it is enough to compute the free-streaming length. By retaining the relevant parametric dependencies we find the following approximate expression
 KeV   106.75  1
λFS ≈ 0.3 Mpc M /ξ	gs(T )	.	(5.10)
Ω

8Requiring that the self-interactions decouple at matter-radiation equality gives an upper bound on
σel/Mπ,

σel
. aeq
3/2 eq
−
≈ 10
aeq
cm2
−
≈ 10
Mπ /Teq cm2
.


/	/	/ /	/ /
Mπ eq	aNR 3H0M 2 ΩDM	aNR	g	ξ	g
This bound has to be compared with the one arising from the Bullet Cluster and it is usually subdominant if DM becomes non relativistic early on.

We notice that the SM temperature when pions become non-relativistic is approximately
TNR ≈ ξ−1(Mπ/3)(gs(TΩ)/gs(TNR)) 3 , which can be much smaller than MeV, so that it
∗	s ∗	s
makes sense to consider g∗(TNR) = g∗(T0). See also [71] for an analytic estimate of the
above quantity. An upper bound on λFS arises from the study of the Ly-α forest [68], assuming 100% of DM. By using eq. (4.14) we can therefore impose the relic abundance constraint and we get the following expression for the free-streaming length

/

λFS ΩDM ≈ 20 Mpc ξ	8
gs(TΩ)
3
.	(5.11)

We see that the effect decouples fast when ξ ≪ 1. Upon imposing the constraint from the
s	s
relic abundance we see that T	|	≈ 60eV/(N ξ )×(g (T )/106.75)×(g (T )/g (T
which for the region relevant for Ly−α constraints is certainly below the e+e− decoupling

temperature, as expected.  Phenomenologically we impose the constraint λ2
coll. .

(0.06 Mpc)2 [69]. These regions are shown in light green in figure 2.
Gravitational waves
The confinement/de-confinement phase transition is expected to be first order for 3 ≤ NF . 4N massless fermions. In this case there can be production of gravitational waves. Actually, most likely the transition proceeds in quasi equilibrium [72, 73] leading to a very small amplitude. Here we entertain the possibility that the transition occurs explosively leading to a larger amplitude. Even so as will show it is quite difficult to obtain an observable signal, see [74] for related work.
If the phase transition completes while the expansion of the Universe is driven by the visible sector we expect a very small power spectrum of gravitational waves, roughly speak-ing suppressed by a factor ξ8, with respect to the case of an analogous phase transition hap-pening in the visible sector. The reason for this suppression can be understood as follows. If the phase transition in the dark sector happens at the dark nucleation temperature and amount of energy ρGW is deposited into gravitational waves, the relic abundance today is
  gs(T )  4 g (T )	ρ	(T )
∗	Ω	∗	0	R	Ω

Where TΩ is the SM temperature after the phase transition, and gs(T ) = gs
(T ) +

3	4	∗
∗,SM

ξ g∗D(T ) and g∗(T ) = g∗,SM(T ) + ξ g∗D(T ). If reheating is instantaneous, by conservation
of energy ρtot(Tn) = ρR(TΩ), where ρR includes all the relativistic contributions to the en-ergy density ρR = ρSM +ρD. The expression for Ω∗gw depends on the production mechanism for gravity waves, by focusing for example on bubble collision contribution we get
L2

 2	2
 2 900   h 	8

H (Tn)		L	
H (Tn)	T 8	ξ

Ω∗	≈
D,n	0
 


g∗	2  4
D,n

(5.13)

Where in the second equality we have estimated the latent heat Lh = T 4 , with TD,c the
critical temperature. Without substantial supercooling TDn ≈ TD,c, therefore we see that
Ω∗gw ≈ ξ8 and therefore completely negligible.

108





107





106





105





104



103	104	105	106	107	108
Mπ [GeV]
Figure 3. Gravity wave amplitude and frequency for the case of unstable pions. Blue and red isolines correspond to the amplitude and frequency of the gravitational waves respectively (assuming supercooling β/H ∼ O(1)). In this region of parameter space the largest signal is achieved when the dark sector is initially at higher temperature than the visible one: the extreme scenario where DM abundance is reproduced starting from an empty visible sector (ξ → ∞) is given by the solid black line. The points where blue and black lines intersect are predictions for the amplitude of the gravitational wave spectrum with the constraint on DM abundance.


The only exception to this intrinsic suppression is to explore models with supercool-ing TDn ≪ TD,c (see for example [75] for supercooling in the visible sector). A phase of supercooling depletes exponentially ρR and makes Lh dominant in the above formula, maximizing Ω∗gw. In this scenario after the phase transition, only the dark sector is popu-lated, leading naturally to models with ξ → ∞. As we discussed in section 4.3, for large ξ, the models are viable only if pions decay fast enough to the SM. In this case, however, the computation of today’s abundance has to be revised to take into account the dilution coming from entropy injection due to pion decays.

Supercooled dark QCD with unstable pions: DM producing the SM. Let us now consider supercooled phase transitions, with TDn ≪ TD,c. When the phase transition completes the dark pions dominate the energy budget of the Universe and then they decay to the SM, reheating it at a temperature TR,π. The energy density of gravitational waves at production, ρgw redshifts as a−4, giving today ρgw,0 = ρgw(a∗/a0)4. If the reheating of the SM happens instantaneously after the phase transition, then eq. (5.12) applies. However, in our secluded case the decay to the SM is not fast and we have to take it into account for the computation of the scale factor. Schematically we identify three stages of evolution,
i) relativistic pions; ii) matter domination due to pion abundance up to pion decay, iii)
standard cosmological evolution starting from a reheating temperature TR,π (instantaneous

entropy injection). Therefore we approximately decompose the redshift evolution as


a∗ =
aNR

1
ρNR	4 ,
ρ∗π

aNR =
aΓ

1

/
ρSM (TR,π )  3 ,
ρNR

aΓ =	T0	0
a0	TR,π	s

1
/
3
,	(5.14)

where ρ∗π is given by eq. (4.12) and TR,π is the SM (reheating) temperature after the injection of the entropy of the dark sector. Assuming instantaneous decay of pions at
HR ≡ 0.33√g∗T 2  /MPl = Γπ the overall redshift can be cast in the form,
a 	 a	  1  3M 2 Γ2  1  T   gs  1

/
Here we assume that the Hubble parameter is dominated by the dark sector until pion decay. With supercooling and instantaneous reheating of the dark sector after completion of the PT ρ∗π ∼ Λ4. Using eq. (5.15) the abundance reads,


ρgw
gs (T0)
4
/
3 g∗ (TR,π)

aNR
  4 
/

1
/
3M 2 Γ2	3

Ωπ−decay = Ωγ
ρ∗π
s∗
g∗ (TR,π)
g∗ (T0)	×	a∗
Pl  π
/
ρ∗π
(5.16)

that holds when (a
4	2	2	∗ /

NR/a∗) 3 (3MPlΓπ/ρπ ) 3 is smaller than one. The peak frequency is also
affected by the dilution, becoming smaller
f  g (T	)  1  T		 a	 1	ρ∗	1

fpeak = 3.8 × 10−6 Hz	∗
∗	R,π
R,π	NR
π	.	(5.17)

H∗	106.75
100GeV
a∗	3M 2 Γ2

The numerical values of the above two quantities are shown in figure 3, where we also show the baryon DM abundance compatible with supercooling (ξ → ∞).
As shown in figure 3 maximal peak frequency in the supercooled scenario is ∼ 10−1
mHz. At such frequencies the maximal amplitude of GWs ∼ 10−11 could be eventually tested with LISA [76]. It is worth noting however, at these frequencies and amplitudes stochastic astrophysical foregrounds also exist. Most notably from the mergers of compact objects such as neutron star- neutron star [77] and white dwarf — white dwarf binaries [78, 79]. Indeed, to probe our scenario (or any other similar scenario) one has to identify and subtract the astrophysical foregrounds. There are two distinct sources of foregrounds at GW frequencies O(mHz), galactic compact binaries and extra-galactic ones, respectively. It is thought that the galactic component of the foregrounds could be subtracted, however, the extra-galactic binary mergers are thought to contribute to the irreducible background or so called confusion noise [80–82]. Finally, we remark that foreground subtraction appears to be experimentally challenging even at frequencies ∼ Hz which is studied in great detail in refs. [83, 84]. Considering all the current experimental challenges, supercooled phase transitions could perhaps be tested given a far future experimental break through.
In this section we have made a preliminary assessment of GW signals in the most optimistic case of super-cooled phase transition followed by dilution due to the decay of massive dark pions. A positive detection of these GWs could point towards new physics realised by models which are classically conformal at high energies. We leave a more dedicated study of GW signals for future work.

Phenomenological summary
From the previous discussion we have identified three possible scenarios that provide the correct relic abundance of dark-baryons and -pions. In this subsection we summarize our findings and comment on the novelty in each of the scenarios. The overall parameter space is shown in figure 2.
Baryon DM + pion DM. If the dark pions are lighter than GeV, they can be cosmo-logically stable. In this branch, both baryons and pions are DM, and the mass scale varies significantly with the value of ξ. The baryons are the dominant component of DM as long as the pions are lighter than Mπ < 100 MeV(f/105GeV)6. This scenario is represented in the left region of figure 2. For ξ < 10−3 the DM abundance is dominated by the baryons (horizontal solid lines in figure 2), and it corresponds to the darkest scenario, with basically no observable effects. For moderate value of ξ instead and for DM dominated by the pions, there could be visible effects in structure formation, both from the Bullet Cluster and Ly-α constraints. The latter strongly disfavor secluded dark sectors with ξ ≈ 1. It is interesting for example to consider the case of an initial value of ξ0 = 1, such a scenario with equal initial temperatures is realized if renormalizable interactions exist between the dark sector and the SM, most simply if there exist heavy fermions charged under both the SM and the dark sector. Note that from eq. (4.6) after the phase transition the dark sector temperature slightly increases. For example for N = NF = 3 one finds ξ = 1.85 (while N = 3 with NF = 2 gives ξ = 2.35). Such values of ξ are grossly excluded by structure formation.
Baryon DM with ultra-light pions. When the dark pions are so light that they cannot be DM, they behave as radiation at the BBN and CMB epoch, therefore they are subject to the bound from ∆Neff. This region, where DM is made entirely by the baryons is the leftmost part of figure 2. For moderate ξ this region is constrained by the value of the number of relativistic degrees of freedom. In the plot we show the expected bound from CMB stage IV, in dark green.
Baryon DM with fast-decaying pions. For larger dark pion mass, pions are unstable, although they could be sufficiently long lived to modify the baryon relic abundance through late entropy injections (still with τπ < 1s to avoid BBN constraints). This region is on the top-right part of figure 2. Since DM baryon are heavy, there is no constraint from self-interactions in this branch of the parameter space. The relic abundances isolines of figure 2 are of two types in this region: horizontal lines with no dependence on Mπ and oblique lines with dependence on Mπ. The former correspond to small values of ξ, that are insufficient to achieve a large entropy injections, while the latter to moderate and large values of ξ. When ξ is sizable, the DM abundance of baryon does not depend anymore on ξ: this is the limiting case where the SM is extremely cold initially and it originates entirely from the dark sector (cfr. eq. (4.19)). As discussed in the previous subsection it is the region of parameter space where we can expect a signal in gravitational waves, albeit a very tiny one and possibly unobservable. The most optimistic predictions for the amplitude and frequency of the gravitational waves are shown in figure 3, which is a zoomed-in version of the upper right region of figure 2.

Conclusions
If DM is part of a truly dark sector, with no sizable interactions with the SM, the experi-mental chances to have a glimpse of the nature of DM are dim. However, while being clearly a nightmare scenario, this possibility cannot be merely discarded. A strong theoretical mo-tivation to study secluded dark sectors is that they elegantly provide cosmologically stable DM candidates without ad hoc assumptions. The seclusion is automatically realized when the dark sector is a non-abelian gauge theory with fermions that are singlet under the SM. This in turn gives rise to interactions with potentially interesting effects for cosmology.
In this work we studied a QCD-like dark sector, connected to the SM only through gravitationally suppressed interactions. This leads to dark baryon and dark pion DM can-didates in different regions of parameter space. Depending on the production mechanism the dark sector has a different temperature from the visible sector and this determines the DM relic abundance and phenomenology. This simple example already generates reach and non-trivial dynamics: an early phase of dark radiation, then a confinement (chiral symmetry breaking) phase transition to a dark sector with two mass scales, the baryon and pion mass.
In the context of gauge theories with fermions a dimension-5 operator through the Higgs portal has a dramatic impact even when suppressed by the Planck scale. This boosts the production of the dark sector through freeze-in and it allows the pions to decay. The latter effect can modify the cosmological history of the Universe with an early phase of matter domination, and severely constrains the scenario if the pions decay at late times. Contrary to the pure glue scenario [11], the existence of pions that are lighter than the confinement scale opens new phenomenological avenues.
Quite remarkably we have shown that gravitationally coupled dark QCD is quite con-strained through a combination of constraints from CMB, BBN, structure formation and self-interactions and can be further tested with future observations. The constraints de-pend on the initial temperature of the dark sector. If the dark sector was originally in thermal contact with the SM only a small region of parameters is allowed where DM is a baryon and pions decay rapidly.
Two regions of parameters are currently allowed. If the pions are lighter than GeV they can make up all the DM and be as light as the mass scale currently tested with Ly-α forest observations. We have carried out a very preliminary study of the impact of light pion DM on structure formation, emphasizing both the role of free-streaming and self-interactions. It turned out that both effects gives parametrically the same model dependence on the matter power spectrum. When the temperature of the dark sector is equal to the SM pion DM would have mass around KeV and this is grossly excluded by structure formation.
On the contrary, when the dark pions are heavier than the Higgs mass they decay before BBN but they can be sufficiently long lived to realize an early phase of matter domination. Upon decay to the SM such a phase ends with a large entropy injection into the SM plasma diluting DM abundance. This leads to baryon DM with mass 100 TeV or larger. In such a scenario the energy budget of the Universe at the dark QCD phase transition might be dominated by the dark sector, opening up the possibility to have signals of gravitational

waves from the first order confinement phase transition, albeit their amplitude and peak frequency are diluted by the entropy injection. Our preliminary study indicates that even in the most optimistic case of sizable supercooling (that is unlikely in QCD-like theories), the peak amplitude and frequency are about ΩGW ∼ 10−11 and O(mHz), respectively. Allowing for a faster decay of the pions might lead to larger observable gravity wave signals.
The exploration of truly dark sectors can be pursued in several future directions. We plan to explore more general portal interactions between the visible and the dark sector, employing the formalism of CFTs, and generalize the discussion of freeze-in in section 3. Dark sectors with a tiny connection to the SM can provide an early phase of matter domination terminated by the decay to the SM via irrelevant operators. Since this can have an impact for gravitational waves, we reserve to explore this possibility in greater detail in future work. For baryon DM indirect detection signal of decaying pions deserve further study. Finally for pion DM a more detailed study of effects on structure formation due to free-streaming/self-interactions is required in some regions of parameters.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by MIUR grants PRIN 2017FMJFMW and 2017L5W2PT and the INFN grant STRONG. We acknowledge the Galileo Galilei Institute for hospitality during this work. We thank Yann Gouttenoire for pointing out a typo in the gravity-wave frequency.

Production of CFT from contact operators
In this appendix we extend the computation in ref. [11] to the production of a dark sector through the Higgs portal coupling,
1	2
Λd−2 |H| O ,	[O] = d .	(A.1)
We will phrase our formulae for a general operator O of the CFT, see [85] for a recent discussion. As a special case they can be applied to perturbative gauge theories with fermions and gauge fields or conformally coupled scalars. The two point function of O in real and Fourier space is given by
⟨O (x) O (0)⟩ =  aO	1   ,	⟨O (p) O (−p)⟩′ = −i  aO Γ (2 − d)  −p2 d−2 ,	(A.2)

The total cross-section for